Bret 0:12
Hey folks, welcome back to the Dark Horse podcast live stream 54 q&a bandit edition limited. I don't know what any of that means. But, you know, here we are some of it.

Heather 0:26
Okay, we're gonna start with a few questions from last time, and then get to the questions from today. All right. This is presumably responsive to the presidential election, this person writes, this is the worst result. If we want to root out critical race theory from our culture, it will now go back into the shadows and further metastasize in our institutions with a complicit tech media industry. While a complicit tech media industry provides cover for them, and cronies.

Bret 0:57
Yeah, I would say this is obviously a major concern for many of us. I hope it doesn't work out that way. But more generally, I would say, I am concerned that a blue victory here is going to cause a lot of people who saw only the hazard of Trump to go back to sleep. And as frightening as the Trump presidency will have been the era in which the blue team thinks that things are humming along because the person at the at the head is nominally on their team. That's very frightening as well and arguably more dangerous.

Heather 1:39
Yeah, that's, that's an interesting perspective, it may allow more progress to be made over in Wolk, intersectionality critical race theory territory, precisely because fewer people who can't already see it are paying any attention to politics, or political things at all.

Bret 1:55
Yeah, I really do think it's going to cause a reduction in the attention. People are paying.

Heather 2:01
Yeah. And I actually had forgotten. So again, this is questions from Episode 53. A week ago, someone wrote, similarly, It surprises me that after your experience at evergreen, you don't seem all too concerned about the evergreening of our entire nation. What am I missing? Why shouldn't I be terrified? So, you know, there's, it's it's not that we're not concerned at all? You know, it's, I feel like in this case, you've missed a lot of what we've been saying about

Bret 2:27
this. Yeah, I can't imagine anybody thinks that we're not concerned. Well, but I do

Heather 2:31
think that the question is reflective of we refuse to advocate for either of these presidential outcomes, these presidential candidates. I won't speak for you. But I really felt like I was not in even in a lesser of two evils category, because I honestly could not figure out which of these posed a graver threat. And that does not suggest that the evergreening of our entire nation, and critical race theory and our entire culture might not be an existential threat that ends ends democracy in America, I think. I think it's quite possible. But there are there are other risks out there as well.

Bret 3:16
Yeah, I mean, it could could tear the republic apart. For starters, we've also talked about the grave threat that comes from the United States, becoming a lesser power and leaving a power vacuum internationally. So yes, there's really no limit to the possible downside of the evergreening of America. Let us hope that somehow rationality is restored because we can't afford to be governed by this other stuff. Yep.

Heather 3:48
Comments, comment? Trump should immediately move to pardon Assange and Snowden before he's out.

Bret 3:56
You know, it's funny, I totally forgot to say this on the live stream, I was going to suggest this very thing. And I think it's, it's fundamentally important.

Heather 4:09
Assange is American. No, he's

Bret 4:11
not, but he's facing extradition to America. Yeah. Okay. Yeah. So in both cases, I think it is clearly justified in Yeah. And Assange his case, I think it's the only humane thing he's been absolutely tortured by extra judicial means and slandered every which way. So yes, I would favorite that.

Heather 4:35
Absolutely. is unity 2024 happening. Question mark.

Bret 4:40
is unity 2024 happening? The unity movement is retooling at the moment. We are in a situation where you know the fact of the election and its aftermath is sucking up all the oxygen in the room. But yes, we have every intention of moving forward now by saying unity 20 24 that's a very specific sounding plan. And we haven't gotten that far. But we've certainly realized how important unity is we've noticed that the Democratic Party seems to have borrowed and bastardize the concept of unity, which is also suggestive of the fact that for whatever reason, the concept is resonant in the culture at the moment. So, yeah, it is our intent to play a positive role in attempting to preserve the republic going forward, what that means is yet to be determined. But stay tuned.

Heather 5:36
And final question for Episode 53. That we're going back to, we once relied on an apprentice model rather than college as a job readiness mechanism. What individual and or societal value could we gain by enabling apprenticing as a full, partial full or partial college alternative? A lot, depending on the field, right. And I do think that, in some college situations, we do effectively have partial apprentice sign, and it goes by names like a print, like internship, and putting that forgetting all the educational doublespeak that I used to be so familiar with, back when we were college professors. Almost always, when I saw these things being employed by our colleagues, college professors, they looked to me like, ways to get out of work for them to the professor ways for the professors to get out of work. And that's not to say that students don't potentially gain tremendously from actual apprenticeship. But I think many, many young people and the people who are in charge of them, imagine that there is something still going on. And I think it almost entirely is not so especially for work that involves physical, physical hands on product, mechanics, and carpentry and artisanship. And, and such, the idea of apprenticeship seems incredibly wise. And in some ways, in some ways, a lot of art studio is effectively it gets at some kind of apprenticeship, just not by a different name.

Bret 7:22
Well, I love the idea of a return to apprenticeship, but I don't think it's going to work, because I think the economy has changed. And so there's a question about the kinds of skills for which apprenticeship is the right and superior model, those kinds of skills have become scarce? And to the extent that people are

Heather 7:40
and the skills are scarce, or the demand for them is scarce? Both Yeah, so it's it's not it's not a scarcity that is out of whack with, with demand, the as the demand has decreased due to increased automation or whatever, right supply has also decreased.

Bret 7:55
Yes, as as our economy has gotten more efficient, the, you know, people are either relegated to very tiny pieces of a large task, you know, or the task has been automated away. So, anyway, there's question about, like, what is complex enough that apprenticeship is the right way to teach, it still remains as a as an economic force and who wants to train for this thing, even if such a thing still exists today, it may not exist 10 years from now. So there's something to be said for a generalist education, which I also don't think we're delivering. So it's not like I'm defending the alternative model here. But whether apprenticeship makes sense, it's not not so clear. And certainly we would be a mentally healthier culture if there were if there was more craftsmanship involved in in our in our economic structure.

Heather 8:51
I'll just give yet another shout out to the Crawford book shop craft as soulcraft. Yeah, you know, a man who found his meaning having successfully earned a PhD in economics from the University of Chicago, found his meaning fixing I think it's vintage motorcycles that his own shop in Virginia.

Bret 9:13
So the one place I see a deviation actually, though is there's there's a phenomenon inside of science. So science involves a hypothesis generation phase and then a testing phase. And unfortunately, these two things have become both treated very mechanistically. And the there's a loss in many places, including our field in terms of training people to do high quality theory, it's treated as basically a sidelight of the empirical part of the thing. But to the extent that there is high quality theory to be done, and that we still stand to gain from it, apprenticeship may indeed be the right model, especially if you're talking about the kinds of work that crosses From one peak to the next, rather than just simply ascends the peak that we've already discovered. That said, mentorship is done at a distance because it's almost impossible to train somebody to Intuit where the next peak might be. It's a very, yeah. idiosyncratic personal phenomenon.

Heather 10:17
Yeah, you kind of do. I mean, like you can learn, you could learn the techniques from, you know, the lab director or whatever, no, no, the lab manager, but actually figuring out how to find pattern in the darkness, you know, which is what it looks like, at first, when you're walking into any new complex system is done through some combination of you know, maybe we get weekly lab meetings with a formalized interchange of ideas between all the members of the lab from the PI down to the you know, undergrad who's doing the pipetting. The lab based science, this isn't a scene that that we are there ever had, but through just casual conversations in the hallway is to Tasha minutes, it's not it's not apprenticeship, but I'm just thinking of it in our grad school situation. Every Friday night, there was something called bio beer. And this was, you know, explicitly not where you were doing science, it was, you know, a way to unwind at the end of the week, and faculty and graduate students alike would go and have cheap beer together and then you know, go off and clusters or not to do whatever they were going to do with the rest of their evening for I don't know, five to seven or something and be Friday night totally optional. And you would run into this was a giant enough department that we were in at Michigan before it splintered. You know, the buyer, the actual biology department at Michigan that included skin and skin out biologists, you know, Genesis developmental biologist, evolutionary biologists the whole lot, that you actually had a chance of interacting with people that you otherwise never saw. And you could you could share things that you that you didn't see. So it's that this is not exactly apprenticeship. It's not It's not like formal teaching. But I think part of what you were saying a part of what we learned as educators, as college professors for 15 years was, so much of the best education is leaving open the possibility for serendipity of actually allowing people to drop their shields for long enough and to drop their expectations for long enough time to drop, they're like, is this gonna be on the test for long enough to where will I need this for a degree or for my future career, to just let a bunch of things, wash over them, and give them time to pause and look at, you know, the darkness or the lightness, or whatever it is, and go, Oh, that doesn't make sense. I wonder what that means. And have someone else come in from the side go, oh, I've got an insight on that. But it doesn't look to me like it does to you. Maybe if you stand over here, you know, and on and on and on, you just never know, the nature of serendipity is that you cannot predict it. And so you have to leave yourself open to the possibility of it.

Bret 12:42
So I agree with you. And that serendipity part is really important. And it's easy to be lost, because it's hard to defend something like bio beer as an essential feature of a department. But right some level, it may be where the most important cross pollination stuff happens. But with respect to the valley crossing thing, I mean, something deeper, like, it's almost, in my experience, it is almost the case that people who are good at crossing valleys are good at it for ways that could not be taught. They don't necessarily themselves know them consciously. And if they were to try to teach them to somebody else, it doesn't work. And so in some sense, the best thing you can do is what Nick Alexander did, which was mentor at a remove, you know, he could basically root for a process at a distance and offer advice and insight. But without the he did not have a false impression that he was teaching you how to do this work because it didn't translate. Yeah,

Heather 13:40
so I'm gonna actually this is the I think that's exactly right. And it does actually match as well. My experience anyway, with teaching where I do think that both you and I were very successful at actually showing a lot of people, you know, revealing to them through both formal formal reflection and also a lot of discussion that was more informal, how it is that you come to understand the world, the world through an evolutionary lens. But some of our absolutely best students, we were actually just kind of revealing to them what they were already capable of. And I'm thinking, I'm thinking in particular of Drew, who's our research assistant right on on this book, Drew Scheidler. You know, who, who had never had an educational experience, like the one that he was able to have with us. But for both of us were like, Oh, do we just have to get it get out of your way, like we got to figure out what to put put ahead of you. So that you can run into it and just discover and discover and discover

Bret 14:39
Well, it's like if you're getting a lot of garbage feedback in terms of our high quality, what you're doing is you need somebody to increase the signal to noise ratio so that you can detect Oh, how you know I am making progress and then I'm gonna keep going this direction.

Heather 14:56
Whereas a lot of you know for him for you, a lot of you are educational experiences up until some point we're being told. You're just too dumb for this right? You can't you clearly aren't good at this. It's no one got to tell me what I think I know inside but okay, no one is great. Okay, first question from this Well, last hour, this is a two part question. I'm going to start with just the very beginning because I don't know the answer. are either of you familiar with the Pygmalion Rosenthal effect? I am not by that name. Yeah, not by that name. So the rest of the question then reads, let's see if we can make sense of it without knowing it by that name. I feel it is applicable to identity politics in this sense. If people were never told they were victims of inescapable systemic oppression, might they be more likely to succeed? Case in point if your ancestors were slaves, but you never knew that? Might you attribute an impoverished state to other causes, for instance, not working hard, and thus act in ways that achieved better results as if you actually had white privilege. So I wonder if the Pygmalion reference is the text that then became the musical that I can't think of right now with Eliza Doolittle. in which a poor Cockney flower girl becomes elevated to the highest status simply by virtue of a guy coming in and telling her how to talk right at some level and have the

Bret 16:25
menu with six degrees of separation. Think of what it's called analogous story.

Heather 16:31
As Henry Higgins, Eliza Doolittle, I can't think of the name of the actual show anyway.

Bret 16:35
All right, it'll come to you in a second. But um, so yes, but there's a trade off. And implicit here. Yeah, right. So in part of the problem is that personal responsibility works right. For an individual, it does not necessarily increase the amount of pie available to a population. But you can adjust your own place in it by behaving in a way as if you have agency. But there's a tension between that and increasing the available slice of pie to the population. And so these things get all tangled and become politicized in a way that isn't very helpful. But I've made an analogous argument to the one I think the question asker is making my point is that the idea that everything happens for a reason as a metaphorical truth, literally false, metaphorically, true. And the reason that it's metaphorically true, is that if you imagine that everything happens for a reason, and therefore all misfortune is really the gateway to something useful, then you will be alert in the aftermath of misfortune, to the possibility that there is something for you to do. If you are dwelling on what's just happened, and how you've just had a major setback, then you may miss that opportunity. And so it is always best to sort of treat a misfortune as if it is likely to be the gateway to something positive. Because the cost is low on the benefit. Yes, is high. And so I think it's I think it's very much the same phenomenon.

Heather 18:04
Yeah, no, I think that's right. I should have said to that, I probably missed it because my email has been messing with me, but I didn't see a discord question this week. So that is why I have not asked it not because I am. I'm trying to ignore you guys.

Bret 18:19
It is possible that we have answered all the questions that they have. Yes. Wow. No, no,

Heather 18:24
no. All right. My Fair Lady sent me the musical I was trying to come up with Yes. Obviously come up with the two main characters names. But anyway, what oh, that so we've we already sort of answered this. What is going on with Unity? 2024. I may have some time next year, I would like to volunteer help if that is possible.

Bret 18:45
Awesome. Let's find a way to get in touch. We will be putting together a list and when there's a more formal organization, we will reach out

Heather 18:54
that sounds ominous these days. Formal or now we're putting together a list.

Bret 18:59
Oh, right. No, not a list. We're

Heather 19:02
it's gonna be a network. Yes. Thank you for discussing Wait, no, no, no, no. Hope everyone is prepared for the great reset slash mass enslavement doesn't matter whose president it's happening and society will keep allowing it.

Bret 19:17
That's not a very hopeful message. No, no, it's

Heather 19:19
not. I wish I knew a little bit more about what there are lot of ways that people can arrive at that. That thinking and I'm not sure what exactly is underlying this particular one?

Bret 19:35
Um, yeah, I mean, I think it involves the informal reorganization of things under the woke banner.

Heather 19:46
That's what they're referring to. Doesn't matter whose president right. So yeah, something something that is deeper or broader or both than or whatever politics is floating on the surface. I'm showing up on our screens and antagonizing half the population and making half the population swelled or something. Now there's something there's something deeper and more permanent, is I think, the idea here. All right. Well, I don't know. Thank you for discussing the vaccine. As an aside, my new job is requiring me to wear an ozone generator, instead of a mask. Do you believe they can be a reasonable alternative to masks? Also of note, there are no customers in our office? No sound generator?

Bret 20:30
I mean, I can imagine but so. Okay. Oh, Three? Three? Yep.

Heather 20:36
So I don't I just don't even

Bret 20:38
I think it's going to be probably functioning on the basis of the charged particles. By the way, I'm going to get

Heather 20:47
we're not chemists are

Bret 20:50
going to get piled on if not canceled by chemists. If I get this ozone

Heather 20:55
cancellation, that'll right first. So I think so Oh, three must be charged because it is not

Bret 20:59
right. And so those charges are liable to pick up organic molecules, including things on the surface of these viral particles, or the water is

Heather 21:13
why wearing it as opposed to just having one in the room would be important. So like if you are shedding viral particles, maybe it would bind to them.

Bret 21:20
Right? On the other hand, far afield from from things that we actually know. Yeah. So I would imagine that, you know, so just simply binding up the surfaces of pathogens can prevent them from doing what they would otherwise do. And in other words, if you imagine the spike protein in crusted in ozone, it's not going to fit the, the the receptors on the other side. And so backing but

Heather 21:47
not any ion, not any charged particle is going to do that, presumably, probably

Bret 21:52
it would. And so there's a question about Okay, if that's true, what's the cheapest

Heather 21:58
charged party ozone is more stable than most or something? Well, and we have a

Bret 22:02
lot of experience with it. So maybe the chances that it does, I would imagine that actually in concentrated form, it probably isn't all that safe. But there's probably some level of it, which effectively does something parallel to what would happen if you open a window and increase the volume of the space? If you take an enclosed volume? And you put a number of particles out there that bind up the pathogens? I could see it happening. Never heard of it, though. Yeah, never heard of it either. So anyway, I'd like to know and

Heather 22:32
instead of our mask is odd. I mean, unless the unless this mechanism that you proposed is right, and you're sort of wearing it right, like you have in your cheeks or something. That's what I've got highlighted here,

Bret 22:45
for me to wear an ozone generator instead of a mask. Yeah. Yeah, I don't know.

Heather 22:57
So yeah, we don't know if it could be a reasonable alternative, because we've never heard of it before. Also,

Bret 23:01
boy, I'm really now I'm going to definitely have said something wrong. Because I've composed two mechanisms, one of them has to be wrong, both of them might be wrong for you, but is it also possible that it changes the density of these particles because one of the problems of the airborne viral particles? Yes, the aerosolized ones. So the aerosolized ones hang in the air, which is one of the things we've learned late in this process is that it's not like particles get coughed out and hit the floor. Some of them have they don't do this. They some of them do this, some of them float. Yeah. Is it possible that the buoyancy of these things in the air is altered by having charged particles of oxygen? Yeah, that might cause them to fall to the floor and get picked up by your vacuum?

Heather 23:50
Yeah, maybe you have two alternative possible mechanisms for why this might work. That's how that's that's how it's done. Right? one or both of them might be wrong. Right? Yes, that's fine.

Bret 24:03
There we go.

Heather 24:05
Um, I don't totally know what this means. And I don't know what that acronym stands for. So I'm going to read this, but maybe you can help me translate it Breton. A well known online retailer, my org has a new official policy that 100% level eight positions will have a bln a successor identified legal workaround. I criticize this anonymous feedback, no answer. I want to blow the whistle, but I fear for my job. I don't know what DLNA stands for do.

Bret 24:35
No, I don't. I'm very much against whatever is happening to this person.

Heather 24:42
Does that sound that sounds like it's dismissive, but it's really not like it's clear that there's something What does bi stand for? So far, I get nothing. Why is it so slow, busy line. Oh, Sir bilateral Lightwave network analyzer breast lymph node Assa. You've heard it here first guys we find nothing of use. Yes.

Bret 25:07
That's I'm very curious about what is happening, but I don't have a clue. Yeah, sorry. Currently it's black, Latino or Native American. Oh, okay.

Heather 25:22
Oh, so at a well known online retailer, my org has a new official policy that 100% of level eight, we don't know what that is, but at some rank positions will have what was it black, black, Latino, or Native American successor identified?

Bret 25:37
legal workaround? Yeah. Well, we've seen a lot of these legal workarounds. Yeah, you can diversify a college administration by creating a position for diversity, equity and inclusion, which it would be obviously untoward to staff with a white person

Heather 25:53
on you do and first so we know more about what goes on academia than an online retailer organizations. But first, you create whole new divisions of the college that are about that. So you guarantee that not just one person, you know, not just your dean of equity, inclusion and diversity, whatever it is, but everyone downstream, your vice president, your dean and everyone downstream. Yep. are all about this one thing. So

Heather 26:20
yeah. I. So the problem for you, and I don't know what to say

Bret 26:26
the problem is what we blow the whistle to, and how will that work? Yeah, you know, a lot of

Heather 26:31
these and this and this is exactly the thing that would be more possible under this administration than an abundant administration. Is is, you know, getting any sort of the whistle would be blowing the whistle. Yes. Yeah. Sorry. Yeah. blowing the whistle on this. We already I guess, I guess we've already seen that the new administration has said that one of the first things it will do is reverse the presidential order, or the executive order. Banning CRT trainings. Which, no, it did not ban diversity trainings of all sorts and banned CRT trainings. Yeah. Which are nasty and divisive. This is this, this will get harder, this sort of thing will get harder if there's any interface at all with the federal government under the new administration. Yep.

Bret 27:17
No, this is a terribly frightening transition in this regard. Yep.

Heather 27:23
Similar to nationalism, isn't racism, an expression of tribalism? Given the evolved nature of tribalism? Is there any hope of truly overcoming these divisions and uniting the world? Or are we doomed to petty sectarianism?

Bret 27:34
Oh, wonderful question. You are, right. People don't like this. But you're right, that racism is an expression of what I would call lineage selection. Why anyone thinks otherwise? I don't know. We've talked ourselves in circles around this for no reason. It's actually straightforward matter. However, your concerns in the second part of your question I don't believe are well founded. In fact, I think we know that they are not, because if you build a system, in which collaboration with people to whom you are not closely related, is profitable, then people engage it willingly.

Heather 28:16
And we see this as profit isn't inherently monetary.

Bret 28:19
I mean it in the in a much more general sense. So yes, the secular pluralistic cosmopolitan West is really a demonstration of this, which doesn't mean that we ever fully achieved it. But it does mean that all of the things that we have done that have rendered things like race and sex secondary, in terms of where they fall on people's, you know, schema of considerations has been wildly productive, right? We have all profited from putting these things as secondary or better non important considerations. And the answer has, it remains to keep going down this road, the farther we go in this direction, the more we look past these things, in order to achieve what we're trying to accomplish, the better we do. And this is why some of us are, you know, so troubled by this woke revolution is that it is threatening to undo the progress that we've made to cause us to forget what the objective was and why it was a good thing. And frankly, you know, it's going to return us to a prior state of history that was much worse.

Heather 29:33
Regardless, this is from Ilan Tusk. Whoa. Regardless of effectiveness, decisive speech regarding decisive action will enable the media to announce the Biden presidency has, in just days, done what Trump could not, the DNC voters will propagate the narrative. I think this could apply to anything. I sort of suspect this may be about COVID, but it's it is true That the narrative need not match underlying reality for it to be accepted.

Bret 30:05
Yeah, I'll go one step better, which I think is what the question is getting at, which is that in light of the fact that in some sense, a Biden presidency will be compared to a Trump presidency, all the time, the blue team will decide that, you know, just as if Trump did it, it is wrong. If Trump said it, it is false, it's going to be the opposite. And that is going to be just as maddening if not more so

Heather 30:31
well, and particularly dangerous so that, you know, there's the opportunity for the woke army to get in and to, you know, get Biden to do let's get the administration to do some things that are quite the opposite of what the executive order did, and to have half the country have knee jerk appreciation for it, because they cannot imagine that it is there's anything wrong with

Bret 30:54
that. Yeah. Yeah, I agree that we are going to get a reactionary upregulation of the structural elements of this.

Heather 31:05
Yes, yes. You're 30 minutes. Okay. We will get through a few more here and then move into the questions from this hour. What do you make of Jordan Peterson found Jordan Peterson's family's all meat diet from an evolutionary perspective. Notably, it ostensibly cured the daughter's arthritis and a sort of health problems for Jordan, is there a possible benefit to certain people of niche diets? So that second question is different in easy? Yes, there's a possible benefit to certain people for niche diets, there's not going to be one best diet for all people. And depending on what your lineage is, what your ancestors ate, especially if you are very rare and don't come from an agricultural background. If you're of a lineage in which agriculture is very, very new. It's much more likely actually that a niche diet might be might have health benefits for you. But the first question is about the all all and not just all meat, but all beef, right? It was, it was all beef diet, beef, and salt, and water, I think. And

Bret 32:12
so let's just say there's going to be a cost and a benefit. And to the extent that we are complex systems, with the massively complicating factor of an immune system that can react to just about any significant organic molecule of significant size, there is a danger of being allergic to all kinds of things. And this will be highly idiosyncratic. So if some of us are facing a kind of a general problem, I have a sensitivity to wheat that actually makes anything that has any contact with wheat at all, trigger a inflammation cascade. But one can imagine things that are much harder to avoid than that. And that if you edit the diet down to something like beef, you might eliminate a huge fraction of these things. Now, problem is that will cause deficits of certain things. Not that many, because it's meat, and meat is going to contain all trace amounts of almost everything you need, but not everything. And so,

Heather 33:16
I mean, given that you're not eating human meat, it's not going to have an exact match for what you need. It doesn't

Bret 33:23
need an exact match, it just needs to exceed your minimum requirements in every regard, which it's not going to do, but it will come much closer than a lot of other things. So So in any case, what I would say is, I believe that Michaela, who has rather severe health issues, did experience a massive benefit from this, I have no doubt or little doubt that he's experiencing substantial costs unless he's supplementing for those things that would be missing from an all meat diet.

Heather 33:53
So we're talking about micronutrients, the kind of stuff that you get from from leafy greens and citrus and such, like molybdenum, selenium,

Bret 34:01
right, for instance. So anyway, yes. Nipa dionaea. Yes. And the diet, isn't it? There will be some Selenium in essential, I don't know. All right. This is stuff we could look up before we come on screen here because you don't want to get caught out over molybdenum of all things or just say that Yeah, yes. So anyway, yeah, niche diets make perfect sense. In fact, probably if we survive the next six weeks, maybe in the distant future, we will actually be able to map what each of us requires based on our sensitivities, that is to say, our immunities based on our ancestry and what was in the diets of our ancestors that we now need in disproportionate amounts you can imagine tailoring your diet.

Heather 34:47
I'm less excited about this. There. There have been there have been a lot of attempts at this point. And most of they're naive enough that they're failing because they're naive, but

Bret 34:54
he suck. I'm not saying they don't but I am saying is, you know, the cost. I was Paying for not realizing that I had an allergy to wheat for all of those years was so gargantuan the idea of some sort of screening that could say, Actually, these things are a particular problem for you, these things are safe. And here's something that you have disproportionate needs for, in principle, now be very

Heather 35:19
obviously, you tried to get screened, and nothing ever came back as positive for wheat. And when you finally just said, Well, you know, to hell with the experts, I'm gonna do this elimination diet approach and, and started adding back things back in, you know, it became very clear what your actual problem was. And so I would just add with regard to an all meat diet, that you're elimination, doing elimination diets in order to figure out what if anything in your diet is making you sick, is an excellent approach, you know, far better than treating symptoms with drugs, for instance, but elimination diets tend to involve a very strict reduction in all sorts of diversity in what you're eating, and then slowly, very carefully, adding things back in. And the not adding things back in. struck me as potentially long term quite dangerous, you know, at least I suspect, maybe there were multivitamins involved, and I'm not in general, I'm not I'm not a fan of getting your nutrients from multivitamins, I think you should eat leaves instead like meat, you know, if it was just meat and leaves, you know, then then that to me would feel like, okay, you know, I'm gonna want some carbs for sure. But meeting leaves feels like it could definitely be a complete a complete diet, you want to be very selective about the leaves, you want to be selective about the meat to Well, that's true. But perhaps more selective about the leaves. But at least at least there you would be getting you would have a chance of getting everything that we think you need in a human diet. Yep. I read, Daniel writes, in oncogene book that caretakers of people who survived bubonic plague No, I think it means. Yeah, I'll just read what says caretaker caretakers of who survived Blahnik plague past on the gene for disease. resistivity, such as HIV resistance, however, said gene was linked to inflammatory bowel diseases. Colon cancer may be a catch 22.

Bret 37:18
Yep. I spent a long time the story. I do. Remember the story you might. So yeah, look, welcome to complex systems. This is how they work right now. There's no advantage you can have that doesn't come with disadvantages, and we don't have a very good map of them every so often, we spot one.

Heather 37:35
I just it's a perfect example of selection. Yeah, like people were walking around with a greater chance of inflammatory bowel disease had no idea why. And those people were presumably more likely to survive. Because the flip side of that negative trade off, which is the only one they had experienced before, was being able to be more likely to resist bubonic plague, right? Is it worth it? Is it worth it if you never ever run into bubonic plague, know if those are the only two things involved in the trade off,

Bret 38:05
right. But I would just point out implicit because we study cancer the way we do, because we're so obsessed with curing it, which makes sense. We label things oncogene. Right. But really, the point is, all of those things will be there for some reason. And when the gene flips into a different state, it will end up being the trigger for a tumor. But you know, what logic explains the presence of these things? If it was not that those genes did something else in their functional life? So we could just sort of expect it? Yep.

Heather 38:42
Oops. Let's see. Next question, if I can figure this out. Have you seen any recent trustworthy studies on COVID implications with pregnancy? The mothers in the second trimester, the father slash husband just had tested positive, and we're looking for reputable studies? I have not I'll bet that there are very few, if any, given how new this you know, if there are any, there will be very few and they'll involve a tiny number of people.

Bret 39:15
There are certain to be anecdotal reports, yes, that's different from studies. Right. But from the point of view of somebody looking for advice on how to behave, which I think I

Heather 39:28
mean, I think, you know, my first level of response is if there's any possibility of quarantining the father, husband, from the mother whose second trimester pregnant do so yeah, right. Just, you can even take being apart for seven weeks or seven weeks or seven days, or, you know, two weeks, whatever the numbers should be. If you have the ability to do so, if you live in a one bedroom apartment with one bathroom, and you have no ability to go somewhere else. That's really, really challenging.

Bret 39:59
Yeah. My mother is second trimester. So has another three months coming to her. So up to six. Yeah. So here's, here's the question. So in certain cases like HIV, right, it was thought that an HIV positive mother could convey HIV to her offspring in utero didn't turn out to be the case. It turned out to be transmitted in blood, often at birth, which was something that could be addressed

Heather 40:29
by sent to actually provide a barrier, but

Bret 40:33
not actually circulate between mother and offspring. Although lots of things crossed that barrier. Obviously,

Heather 40:38
placenta is amazing. It is

Bret 40:40
stunning. It's a really amazing underappreciated organ. But so the question here is a Is there something special about SARS COVID, to which there might be and I worry, again, if this is a lab leak, which it may well be that we may have imbued it with superpowers with respect to things like crossing the placenta. But it is also possible that this is going to be another one of these cases where, you know, millions of years of immunological evolution have provided a proper barrier. And the time period is long enough that even if the mother got COVID, from the Father that she would be done with it at the point the baby was born, and it might be protected, which I don't, you know, that's still a frightening prospect. And the,

Heather 41:26
there's a lot of ifs there. But if if you had to be in this situation, but got to choose which trimester second would be the best choice, I would think because first is just the baby, the fetus is too fragile. Third, there might still be lingering effects, you end up third would be wrong. But anything from like, mid second to mid third trimester is, you know, sort of the sweet spot if you have to be in the situation.

Bret 41:49
Yeah, that said, I, as I keep saying, I don't think we're paying enough attention to the so called long hollers and I don't also know what the chances are if you get COVID that you end up along, holler. But those, those cases are so frightening that you know, somebody who's about to be dealing with an infant, doesn't want to be in that boat. So I agree with your advice. If there's any way to quarantine the father, it's the right thing to do. Yeah.

Heather 42:18
Okay, there's a request for a reading that I will, I will look at and assuming it is what this guy says it is. I'll read it next time. owed to spot by data. The Android. You familiar with it? No, no. Apparently Star Trek cats biology, love poetry and AI all intersect. Okay. Okay, we're gonna do three more here and then move into the next hour. What are your thoughts on open access regarding scientific research? How constructive? Would it be for scientific education for the general public? And what side effects could it have of this podcast? It's a big question.

Bret 42:56
Open Access to scientific.

Heather 42:58
So she says, I think so she says, research, I read the first time as literature the results of the research, right? I don't know that open access research is really a thing. Yeah. But what do we think about? Yeah, more more journals being like plus, for instance?

Bret 43:17
Yes, I would say absolutely. 100%. Why is it taking us so long? Aaron Schwartz was right. How do we let this happen? Of course, this stuff should be open source, we paid for the research in the first place,

Heather 43:30
the sticking point is the money. So the sticking point at the moment is the entrenched interests who are controlling it and making money. But the one piece of their argument, so Elsevier, for instance, that is actually true is well then who's going to do the work, right, like the editing. And you're already already the peer review is done for free as an expectation of the job of being a science professor or researcher. And it's pretty thankless and often grueling and ridiculous. But you know, we do it when we're asked for the most part. But the editing and the publication and all of that that's, you know, it's it's, it's real work, and it would need to be funded somehow. And, you know, and how does it now have to get written into every grant, as you know, NSF need, you know, a big influx so that it is now I don't even know how it works. But But yes, if we can wave a magic wand and solve the financial barriers, it should all the scientific literature should be open to all

Bret 44:36
absolutely and lovely. And frankly, I don't think it's all that hard to solve. But I think you're just dealing with publishers that have an understandable but unjustified desire to frustrate this.

Heather 44:48
Yeah, I mean, we thought that we were in trouble with the democrats now we got Elsevier and we can oh my

Bret 44:53
goodness, but you know, look plus demonstrated this and it's doing Double and it's overdue and the glaring injustice of publicly financing science that the public doesn't have access to the product of is absurd. And what's more, that period at the beginning of COVID, where so much was available, because it was going on preprint servers, because there was no time for peer review proved how broken and backwards that peer review system is, which is, anyway, oh, a demonstration. It could be done better.

Heather 45:27
elsewise, yeah, no. And so I actually, I use the literature a lot. And we have access again this year, because we are once again, visiting fellows at Princeton. But at the end of this academic year, we'll lose access again. And I honestly don't know how to continue to do the, you know, I'm not doing lab research, and I'm not going out into the field and doing, you know, field research. But in order to stay abreast of what people are thinking and how people are our how people are publishing in science and what the science looks like. As you know, as a scientist, I need access to literature, and I'm about to lose it.

Bret 46:07
Well. And this is part of the mechanism by which the gatekeepers keep the gate is discovered repeatedly, that there's no obvious mechanism, not even an obvious mechanism, it would seem for an individual who needs access to the scientific literature, but isn't part of an institution that provides that to just simply by accident,

Heather 46:27
can't even buy access, you cannot even buy access, it's not that we don't have enough money, you cannot buy access, right?

Bret 46:32
So in some sense, this is also a

Heather 46:35
fancy way to buy access as you need to be in an institution. So you know, is that viable? Probably for some people, but well,

Bret 46:44
but in any case, it does various things. One, it means that for people who are not in an institution, you buy access to only those narrow journals in your immediate field, you can do that right. But the point is that incentivizes thinking only narrowly about things which is not good. See earlier discussion about staying in your lane and the hazard of it?

Heather 47:07
Well, I mean, you've heard the story. But you know, I'm reminded of my interview at evergreen, where one of the best scientists on campus, so I have a lot of respect for and I won't name here, but he, academic interviews are several days long, like two, two and a half days. And at one point, I had an hour break, and I want to explore the library. Because you were coming from this great research university with a massive, so many libraries, and just just amazing and this was before everything was online. And I was super disappointed in evergreens library. It was just it felt very provincial, and there was no sharing agreement. Unlike saying the California system where the most, you know, the smallest Community College has access to Cal's library in the California public university system. But there's no such thing in Washington State. And so you know, we didn't, evergreen didn't have access to UW library, University of Washington's library, like, like it should have their public institutions. They should, at the very least, but now. So I went back and asked this person who was chairing the hiring committee, who was ended up hiring me, said, what, what do you do? The library is terrible. I don't know how you how you do science with this library? Do you have access to some other other universities library? And he said exactly this, he said, Well, I subscribe to the three or four journals that I need for my work. And that's enough. Yeah. And you know, this, this is a really smart, broad thinking guy, who still for his, for his research was just doing this. And I thought I need you know, I can't, I can't begin to tell you what the journals are that I want to look at, because I look at a paper and I go to the ref cited and I find some paper there. And it takes me here and it takes me here. And no, it also doesn't work if I have to wait five days between each one of those links for some, you know, Interlibrary Loan thing to come through,

Bret 48:58
right. And so all of these things are actually mechanisms by which the top places cause the most interesting discoveries to be kept in house is that if you're anywhere else, you are swimming upstream in order to do the work, right? The quality of the library of the institution tells you something about how much you have access to look at how quickly you can move from one paper to the next. And sometimes you're three or four deep in an afternoon, right?

Heather 49:26
And the different the different economies of basically the first world and everywhere else presumably means that for instance, Latin American researchers are completely hamstrung by this. Not only are they not reading the literature in their first language, although you know, everyone else is more bilingual than Americans are more multilingual than Americans. So it's mostly not the biggest problem is not I think, a language barrier. But that presumably, the vast majority of Latin American universities and I assume this is also true elsewhere, not in the weird world, simply don't have access to nearly as many of the online journals as the best universities in the US and, and Europe and Japan do.

Bret 50:05
Yep. So at every scale, it's a mechanism of the Matthew effect to those who have much, much will be given. Right? Yeah, so those positive feedbacks are really diabolical and completely without justification. And, you know, real a

Heather 50:23
real example of privilege, a real example of privilege which open source publication would open access to the scientific literature would help to begin to eradicate and Yep. Thank you for the stay in your lane, who am I discussion I believe the same way and tend to get passed by or the evil I never occurred to me might be because of the lack of control ability. This next one, we will go to next time about teenage antidepressant use obviously deserves more of an answer than I have time we have time for right now before we move on, so we will get to that next time. Okay, top of the Super Chat questions from this hour. wokeness is a virus that rewires people's compassion circuitry, leaving them unreachable by reason. Could you run gain of function research and engineer a potent mind virus with the capacity to overwrite wokeness? If so,

Bret 51:20
how? What do they think James Lindsay and Helen pluck rose are?

Heather 51:25
Oh, oh, what Chris and Lindsey are gain of function anti woke research?

Bret 51:31
Yeah. Okay. I mean, right. Yeah. Good. almost literally good. Yeah. Very nice. So yeah, I mean, you know, you're being glib, but at some level, yeah. This is the right ideas that meet we need. Well, let's put it this way. The opposite of wokeness is not sleepiness. It's awakeness. And we need awakeness. Yeah, contagious in a way that suddenly we're all in on the joke and again, moving in a reasonable direction to address actual oppression without creating catastrophe.

Heather 52:03
Excellent. Do you think that with climate science, vaccines, voter fraud, a narrative is formed along and mostly correct idea, but allows for no dissent whatsoever in order to fight off more outrageous claims against it? Yeah, that is part of that is at least the justification in people's heads. I think there is some truth to that in some in some cases, but it obviously creates a positive feedback problem, where a no dissent will be tolerated.

Bret 52:31
Right. And I mean, it's not only no dissent, but the idea that you know, well enough what the story is to build a narrative that then functions to drive out the Outlander stuff means that the very stuff which causes improvement in the narrative is now ruled out. Right? So it's like, deciding that you've solved the problem by eliminating all mutation, right? Okay. Well, you have solved a problem, but you've caused a much bigger problem. And so Yep. Yeah, it's it's a terrible idea. But yes, I do think that the people who enforce these narratives tell themselves some kind of story like this and then sleep better than they should.

Heather 53:18
In addition to breathwork and senescence, are there any more suppressed findings or intellectual bombshells that the world should know more about? No doubt, I can't think of what they are right now.

Bret 53:30
The answer is all over the damn place. And the problem is sorting, you know, it's not an easy job to figure out where the untold stories are amongst the the crack pottery, but But anyway, yes, it's all over the place. And there are other examples. And we talked a bit about Luca Turin, that was another example. But yes, it is widespread and cataloguing it is, is well worth doing. You know, Mike, moo. That's a good one. And in fact, the whole point of the Dark Horse podcast The reason for that name was that there are many such stories that need to be told. And anyway, we will do more of that soon.

Heather 54:19
Not only was harder than I thought to find a fellow Florida voter friend to cancel out plan to do opoli votes and vote third party, but some of my friends seemed offended by this. What is going on?

Bret 54:33
Okay, I'm, I'm suppressing my glib response to this now. So really welcome. Oh, okay. You need better friends. That's why it's not very nice thing to say. But yeah, I mean, look, I think the problem is, once you tell people, it's a very complex world. The simple answers you've been handed are actually in many cases incorrect. And the only time Choice is for you to approach these things very consciously and reason through them. And a whole lot depends on getting it, right. That's the kind of responsibility people don't want. And so in essence, they their comfort derives from the fact that Oh, I know that x and y, therefore, z is a formulation that explains to me why I don't have to think any more about this question, because I already know the right answer. So anytime you open that up, and you say, Oh, actually, you know, your priors are wrong. It is taken as a threat because it's like, well, geez, if we're suddenly looking at whether my priors are right, the whole universe is going to come apart. And I'm going to suddenly been having to think all the time and be very uncomfortable. So I've got lots of stuff to do. I got stuff to do, especially to think all the time, right? I gotta get back on Twitter. To be thinking, right?

Heather 55:51
Even though this isn't over yet, the left thinks they won and are still making lists of people to be destroyed. They made a site that docks is Trump donors. I didn't know about that one. But it doesn't surprise me. Yeah, no, the the calls for unity that Biden made in his his speech lasted about five seconds beyond that speed.

Bret 56:12
Oh, no, it means something different. Okay. We have to unify against the enemy. Oh, yes. So that's what unity means. So I think of it as unity versus unity. And I must say, I'm a huge fan of reason.

Heather 56:27
You're not a brand

Bret 56:28
guy. Yes. There's a reason I'm not a brand guy. It's because yeah, I mean, this seems pretty clear. Yeah. Yeah. So yeah, don't let counterfeit unity stuff. It's it's got a very one dimensional flavor. It's like, we

Heather 56:44
should hate those guys. Oh, yeah. All right. What is your opinion of sports team names like the Cleveland Indians, or the Civil War rivalry game between Oregon State and UVO, University of Oregon.

Bret 56:58
Let's put it this way. If this wasn't happening in an era where we're actually pulling down statues of Abraham Lincoln, I would be much more open to the idea that this is something that needs to be addressed. Because there's obviously a question, right? It's obviously, you know, in the, in the case of the Cleveland Indians, it's obviously a caricature. Right? And

Heather 57:18
well, I, I don't know, but I just don't know anything about sports teams, honestly. But I think I think I can pull into my head the like the mascot, not the mascot, but like the image

Bret 57:30
of the icon, and I believe the mascot

Heather 57:32
is the same. So that's a caricature, right? But is the name itself a character? Like couldn't? Wouldn't it be possible to get rid of the thing? And like the the image and keep the name as an homage? Not to the character but character, but to the actual group of people who, you know, didn't fight live on this land? Right?

Bret 57:55
Yeah, look, I think there's a discussion to be had. It's not like I don't think there's anything to be talked about. And it's not like I think it's simple. Like, the whole thing is, obviously it's got to go because because the characters offensive, which it probably is, but

Heather 58:09
and then I mean, this one about the Civil War, I actually ran into a guy. months ago now, as I was putting my paddleboard in the water, a student at gosh, I can't remember which which one of these it was, but he told me about this rivalry game between Oregon State and U of O. And so that was called the Civil War. And now there was a move to get rid of that, that naming and, you know, I thought that I thought I was thinking about it a little bit more afterwards, like, but that imagines that the only time you invoke Civil War, you're invoking the American Civil War, right? And the American Civil War had, you know, you know, like World War Two there, there are these occasional wars, you're like, actually, there was a right side, there really was an evil whether or not people living on the ground at the time could or could not see it, but there really was without that much historical vantage point and ability to be like, Yeah, actually, you guys were wrong. And you guys were right. And in those two cases, like the right people one, not the case for a lot of wars, and not presumably the case for many civil wars, and I just don't know enough about various other civil wars, to be able to right now list off a bunch of them. But a civil Civil War just refers to a war between factions within a country. And, you know, this is the two big state schools in the state of Oregon, and the rivalry is called a civil war. So it's being cancelled because it's imagine that one of the schools thinks they're the south like, I can't even imagine like what the cancellation reasons are, unless the very word civil war are simultaneously like a historical it can only mean one Civil War. Well,

Bret 59:50
I mean, I think there's a translation here Okay. Okay. I'm not I I do think, you know, I'm open to be convinced that we have this wrong, but I agree with you. Civil War is a It's a term of art that describes a certain kind of conflict. And the idea that this is now beyond the pale is absurd. But what I would say is the targeting of these things, is very simply a demonstration of power. Right? Yeah, we have the ability to get you to remove that statue,

Heather 1:00:18
right? Well, in the case of the statue, more generally, we're going to do it late at night, because we're getting our

Bret 1:00:23
UI, right, but you won't put it back up, we have the ability, we are now the city planners who decide what there will be monuments to in the city. And if that involves pulling it down in the middle of the night, and you're not putting it back up. So be it. Right. But my basic point is, there is a sort of test of how much how much power a person or a movement has, and the ability to get stuff renamed. Right is just a, an affirmation of the power. And so I guess that's my point about yes, even Indians is that I think there is a question but now's context, it's very hard to distinguish it from all of the just demonstrations that, you know, we have the power to cancel George Washington and Abraham Lincoln and all sorts of other things.

Heather 1:01:08
And I mean, and that's part of what entrenching is, is people just being like, not in this context. Like maybe that's the right thing to do. But me resisting doesn't make me racist. I'm saying there's no way for anyone to know if this is the right move, given the accelerating force behind this movement. Yeah.

Bret 1:01:26
Right. Yeah. And so there's also a, a dimming of the standards. So for example, if you take the N word controversy, yeah, my contention is that for decades, there was an agreement, an informal social agreement, that you didn't use that word, right? Except in a context, you weren't black, it was necessary, right? If you were black, you could use it if you're white, you didn't use the word unless you were reading Huck Finn, you were, you know, singing Bob Dylan or quoting his lyrics, you know, you were using it in a context where it was necessary for some reason, or you were talking at them illogically, or you were talking historically, or you were quoting or whatever. And the point is the idea that it is actually the uttering of the syllables. That is the crime rather than the using the term and Ernest is obviously absurd.

Heather 1:02:20
Well, and this is part of what we've talked before about them saying intent doesn't matter. Right? This is like this is pushed to its furthest limit. intent doesn't matter. I said, like, what was that Professor? Who said something in Chinese I think who said it sounded something like the N word, right? And he gets cancelled for it. Like, Oh, my God, dude, like, you have totally lost the plot. It was literally two phonemes put together. That sounded like a word. That is an epithet.

Bret 1:02:46
Right? Except haven't lost the plot. Because the basic point is actually we have the power to make every person parse their speech at the level of syllables watching out for the danger that they will say something that sounds nearby to something offensive, right? There's a culture of fear. That's a lot of power, right? So yes, yeah. Yes,

Heather 1:03:03
it is. Someone recommends that we read human action by mice's I've never heard of it. But we'll take it under advisement. Hey, guys would love the show? Would you consider talking to Michael malice about the idea of division? He is for it would love to hear this discussed seeing as unity is kind of your whole thing

Bret 1:03:23
is for division and his name is malice. That's incredible. Am I wrong?

Heather 1:03:29
I don't think he's for division. Because

Bret 1:03:34
maybe I misread it. He is he wants to talk. Oh, all right. All right. So we have a do over. We'll put

Heather 1:03:45
it on the list. Possible people for Brett to talk to you on the Dark Horse podcast. All right. Hi, wonderful folks. I've been discussing my mask etiquette akin to tipping the hat or handshakes to briefly show my face upon meeting strangers in public. bottom two thirds of the face can say so much. Any others? Thoughts?

Bret 1:04:06
Oh, this is awesome. Yeah, this is awesome. So I have also it's not the same thing. But it's related, which is in the case where you don't have the mask at hand. And you need to, like we were at a place where we were getting takeout on Orcas Island. And I had to go pick up the bag from the window, right but realized as I was approaching that I had goofed and the mask wasn't there. Right? I held my breath, which is frankly, just as good. If you really aren't going to exhale in the period,

Heather 1:04:38
except you literally didn't have a mask visual visible, and you induce the ire of one of the people who was standing pretty far away from you couldn't tell you we're all in your breast, breast, holding your breath. And you're done. That imagined I think, yeah, that you were one of these, you know, anti maskers they're on orcust Bring the scourge to the Islanders, right.

Bret 1:05:02
But the thing I keep I keep trying to say it and I just can't, I can't formulate it so that it sticks is that there is a, if you understand what the goal is and why it's important, and you're on board, yeah, there's a whole landscape of places you can borrow from, you can go outside and not wearing a mask and you're not violating the rules. You can hold your breath when it's a, you know, a 32nd interaction that doesn't require you to speak,

Heather 1:05:27
right? Do you think that holding your breath would help?

Bret 1:05:33
But the point is, can you imagine a world where we all have a good model of what's going on and what the objective is, and we're all on the same page that we should be doing our best to do this, that there is a trade off between? I mean, you know, we're not walking around in diving bells. So it's not like we've all decided that, you know, the virus shall never be transmitted, there's some sort of interaction between being able to get the work of the world done and not transmitting the virus. Imagine we were all on the same page and had a good model.

Heather 1:06:04
I, unfortunately, cannot imagine that world. I wish I could, at least right now, since I would have thought that the election regardless of outcome, would have calmed some people down and it seems to have further angered mostly the people whose think they want. Yeah, I don't know what's going on.

Bret 1:06:31
Well, this is another advantage, though, to our approach to the election is that we at least got half of what we want. Either way, either way we win we lose some school will lose

Heather 1:06:44
is BLM and lineage attempt to increase its portion of the ever shrinking pie of stagnated growth. Among some of its adherents, perhaps its originator, certainly

Bret 1:06:54
an attempt, I would say it's not a lineage attempt, that it's sort of disguised as one. But that the movement is actually a composite of many lineages. And one of the things that's utterly predictable is that it will come apart in the end, that it will break down as a result of infighting in part because it isn't the lineage. So yes, you've got the right, the right idea, but you just got to be careful with lineage because it has a very specific meaning.

Heather 1:07:25
What do you consider to be the red line for the slow boil towards tyranny? Are we beyond it? Well, the US eventually arrest people for speech, as is the case in many EU countries.

Bret 1:07:37
Yeah, I think we're headed that way. I hope. I hope we regain our senses before we get there. But yeah, there's all kinds of stuff going on in the UK, for example, where people have the police show up at their door for one thing.

Heather 1:07:52
Yeah, I don't have I don't have more of an answer to that. We just have three more questions in this set. So we'll finish these and then go pick up a few more next time from the previous hour. Someone comments, breathing, ozone can be dangerous. My source is a very Tassie on video about negative ions and a quick internet search.

Bret 1:08:10
So I was I think I didn't say it, I was worried that this might be a consequence that the very fact of these things bonding to organic molecules means they will also bond to your organic molecules, which raises questions. So anyway, yeah, I if I didn't say that I should have. I didn't know that it was dangerous, but it certainly seemed to stands to reason.

Heather 1:08:32
I'm going to reverse the order of these last two questions. The European question, question mark, is it really worth sacrificing all that history and breeding for multiculturalism and socialism? As in Yay, now we've all got a balloon and the bowl of rice did not pass. I believe it's the last one here. Okay. I believe that there's an honest question here. And that there is also a caricature of what would happen if if Europe stops looking as much like it has in the past. That is a character that has some racist undertones. So you know, I have not read I'm finally reading the madness of crowds by Douglas Murray, which is just exactly as extraordinary as I knew it would be. I have not read the strange death of Europe. I listened to your brother's conversation with Douglas Murray, and they talked about it a little bit. And I guess in that conversation, I found a partial answer to this. No, of course, none of us should consider ourselves compelled in any way to pretend that Europe hasn't had excellence and brought excellence to the world and has spread much of that to to everyone In the world, in fact, to all to all corners of the world, not to every single individual, but I don't know exactly what is being, what future is being imagined here. I know much less about sort of immigration issues in the EU than in the US. But just as we've talked about a little bit, neither of the blanket absolute sides on immigration in the US makes sense. Yep. You know, no immigration, open borders. No, and both in both counts, obviously. So well, things in the future look exactly like they've looked in the past. Nope. No, they won't. And that's always been true throughout history, although the rate of change is itself accelerating.

Bret 1:10:44
Yep. I agree. I did read the strange death of Europe a couple years ago. Douglas and I had a meeting that did not happen, but it was scheduled. And anyway, so Yeah, I agree with you. And but I'm not sure who is proposing that we lose that history?

Heather 1:11:03
Well, I think the person asking the question is suggesting it will be lost, it will be lost by by a process that is multicultural and maybe even socialist.

Bret 1:11:14
Yeah, I'm not as convinced of this. Yeah, I believe that there is a pluralistic secular, cosmopolitan way of being that honors the history of different lineages and doesn't erase it, but doesn't use it as the basis for how things are distributed. So anyway, I would like to think there's there is a proper honorable goal that that doesn't run afoul of that standard.

Heather 1:11:42
That said, the Americans perspective is very different in this regard from a European perspective, where, while certainly in pre history, there was plenty of moving across What are modern borders by various populations? Your modern European borders do to some degree, reflect cultural, culinary, linguistic barriers, and the US was always about being something of a melting pot. Right. And so you have you have lots of different immigrant communities, you know, living clustered, but right next to each other. Yeah. And that's, that is a different situation than was the case in Europe until recently. Yeah.

Bret 1:12:23
US was founded as a melting pot, and the EU is a synthetic melting pot, and women populations are somewhat segregated by borders. Right.

Heather 1:12:33
So we have I think, I think individuals, whether they're conscious of it or not have probably different expectations. Yeah. Okay. Final question. If drafted, would you Bret, consider the Unity 2024 nomination for president, you seem to have a knack for making complex issues digestible and are fair and reasonable to all sides of the political spectrum?

Bret 1:12:53
Well, thank you. Let's put it this way. The way you phrase the question, I would have two out of obligation. You know, if it's a draft, right, and it's has a shot, then the point is, yeah, that that's the part of patriotism that involves being willing to sacrifice. It's not a job I would want. I don't think it's a job any sane person could want. But But nonetheless, yeah, you know, there are higher prices you can pay and I'd probably be willing to pay those too. So yeah, I guess so. But let's find somebody better.

Heather 1:13:29
Beautiful. Alright.

Bret 1:13:32
Okay, we've done it. We've reached the end of this 54th live stream is our first podcast as

Heather 1:13:38
we have. Yep. Join us at our Patreon. Subscribe to the channel subscribe to the clips channel.

Bret 1:13:45
What else remain awesome.

Heather 1:13:49
Become awesome if you're not already and remain awesome change lanes, change lanes, change lane change lanes, go outside change lanes. in either order. Yep. And be well avoid COVID then we'll see

This transcript was generated by https://otter.ai