Bret 0:34
Welcome back to The Dark Horse podcast number 84 That was a joke I was not vocalizing it just looked like I was localizing alright alright we are apparently in a silly mood which could be a good thing or not we

Heather 0:50
don't we did up not to have drinks for this.

Bret 0:52
We yeah we're it's endogenous neurotransmitter drugs style stuff

Heather 0:58
yeah it's nothing exotic Yes Yeah, yep. So okay we're gonna do this it's the we'll see how it goes we get tons of great questions we're probably I'd love to try to keep this to an hour just because this

Bret 1:12
is we had our power failure however that happened Yeah, well

Heather 1:16
I mean we heard the transformer blow it was loud it was a loud it was let's scare one of the cats in the air.

Bret 1:22
No, my feeling was just that. I mean, this was more or less an act of God and so it raises the question of whether or not capture goes a good bit higher than we'd thought Hmm, I guess I just accused the deity of being captured by you know, the power company. I don't know I think that you know, they're caught in the middle I would imagine.

Heather 1:44
Yeah, I don't think just got I think this was a technical failure, a technical

Bret 1:47
failure. That's what you'd make a short circuit of some kind.

Heather 1:51
I don't know if Transformers can experience short circuits. I just have no idea how

Bret 1:55
something else short circuits and like something hits the power line and grounds out?

Heather 2:00
No, I think I actually don't think it was something exhaustion as to the transformer because as you pointed out, and what you tweeted, like it's a perfect day here there is Mike. Actually breezy is nice. So you know, perfect makes it sound like any wind would be would be not good. But it you know, it was like 68 degrees, clear blue skies, no wind at all. Just nothing going on.

Heather 2:19
That would have caused 

Bret 2:20
there was really nothing going on.

Heather 2:21
Yeah, there's just nothing going on. Oh, right. Let's do this. Let's do this. We've got four questions from last time. Actually, I had a I it's been two weeks, and a lot has happened. I didn't remember I had actually I actually pulled in 12 questions from last time that I really wanted to get to. But we just we just don't have time. So apologies. As always, we have four from last time we got a question from the discord server, which you can access it on her Patreon. And then we've got a bunch of questions that came in on Twitter using that hashtag. undeterred, I we will, I might just go into Twitter to see about getting some more once we finished some of these. But we'll we'll see how this goes. from two weeks ago for Episode 83 won't have the sudden shift to going maskless indoors result in faster selection for a vaccine resistant strain. Thank you for all that you do.

Bret 3:08
I think this is the right style of logic. Yeah, I can't say that it will or won't. But I can say that all of this sense of like either you're unprotected by the vaccine, in which case, there's no help for you, which is obviously not true on the basis that there are alternatives, as we discussed in there, and there

Heather 3:25
are comorbidities which See, just let's let's make for a moment for not not related to this, but I was pointing out to you. This week, I think that I read the Oregon Health Authority, his newsletter of sort of statistics that come in, I think it's every weekday, maybe it's only a couple times a week, I actually I should know, but I think I've read every single one of them. And it always says you know, Kate COVID cases, COVID deaths, number of tops hospitalized, and then for whatever deaths in the state of Oregon have happened since the previous newsletter. It gives a just a brief policy of like the demographics on that person, how old they were, what county they were in, when they were diagnosed when they died. And then it always mentions whether or not they were comorbidities. Know what they say they don't say comorbidities, they say underlying conditions. And I have yet to see a case that says there are no underlying conditions. They almost always say there were underlying conditions. And on occasion, they say underlying conditions are being confirmed. So underlying conditions is the same as comorbidities, I believe and so just you know, are you not protected at all if you're not vaccinated and not an ivermectin? No, actually, if you're healthy and young and not obese and don't have any of the other any of the other known comorbidities that are you know, unfortunately, highly correlated with bad outcomes from COVID. You are pretty well protected simply by virtue of being who you are.

Bret 4:55
Now, innate immunity is one effective kind of protect Especially for very young people. Yeah, there are pharmaceuticals that appear to work as the meta analysis that we were talking about, demonstrates. And so anyway, I think the question is a good one, though, which is yes, it's the binary thinking that had us, not us, but had most people wearing masks outside, which they didn't need to and was a terrible idea from many perspectives. It's now the binary thinking that has them feeling like if vaccinated pandemic over. And the fact is, there's a lot of frightening stuff that we need to be thinking about whether it's antibody dependent enhancement, whether it's the vaccines being very narrowly focused, and therefore driving the evolution of escape mutants. And frankly,

Heather 5:44
even even the dominant narrative is talking about breakthrough cases. They're talking about

Bret 5:47
breakthrough cases, which is a very important phenomenon, very closely tied to the analysis that Garrett Vanden bush delivered and something to, to be concerned about. And I must tell you, when I saw Dr. Fauci his press conference this week, my sense is, they're settling in for an awfully long pandemic. Why is that?

Heather 6:10
Well, I think what you said was, it's really important to some number of people this pandemic, not end,

Bret 6:19
I must say, I, it's a thought that is obvious, since one obvious interpretation, I can't really let myself have it, because I feel like, you know, short of the very small number of people who are just truly shameless, that even if someone had the thought that the pandemic was good business, the recognition of the number of people who are lost and the amount of suffering that this creates, at every level, every man would force awakeness. And I know that that is a naive thought. But nonetheless, I'm not yet ready to go here. But it does seem like people are settling in for a long pandemic, which at the very least, I think means that the powers that be understand that this is not the silver bullet that they have promised us. Yeah, yeah.

Heather 7:02
wife and I plan to move to the US. We are live left, but our Portland's about our Portland or Seattle too far gone. authoritarian woken schools work tech and homelessness, our blue cities and red states safer for how long? Thank you. So I'm curious. I just thought there's an interesting question. I don't know where they're moving from. And certainly when I was in, was in Austin a couple of weeks ago, and people said to me, I think I said this on air. A few people said to me, be liberal said, Man, I love living in a liberal city in a conservative state, because the tension is there that you need. And, and part of what we've seen in Portland over this last year has been the failure of that tension to pull some things in a direction that might have made more sense. Well,

Bret 7:50
you know, it's funny though, that formulation doesn't quite capture it, because Oregon is arguably a conservative state. And Portland is a very liberal city, but our Governor's liberal, right? Only one major city in Oregon. So the point

Heather 8:04
so yeah, by but this is always going to be the case, right? Like by like a landmass, like Quito. Well, the place where the cows live is conservative. Right? Like,

Bret 8:12
you know, let's take the obvious example. Right? Austin is a liberal town, Texas is a conservative state, but it has, you know, Houston and Dallas, right, and Fort Worth. And so the point is, you need the populace. In order to get the benefit of the liberal city in the conservative state, you need the population to actually exert the tension. And right in Oregon, we don't have the tension, because although the rural parts of the state are fairly conservative,

Heather 8:40
yeah, it's not sufficient. I guess Actually, that's that's exactly. It's because I said, I said this exact thing to a woman I was talking with a couple days ago. And, you know, she said, just like here, you know, we've we live in a conservative state. It's like, it's not though, right? Because Because Portland has such undue influence over the the governance of the entire state. Yeah. And

Bret 9:02
so as to the question of whether it's too far gone. I would say that's a very frightening possibility. I am sort of hoping that these are sorted out. Yeah, I'm hoping that the absurdity causes and awakening, I think it's unfortunate that that awakening has to come in the form of a move towards conservatism because really, I would like it to come in the form of a move towards enlightenment. Right, right. But nonetheless, these policies are so bad that they, they will create disaster in short order and that might have the effect of celebrating the place.

Heather 9:38
Yeah. Yeah, but I mean, we, Portland for all of its problems is is really fabulous.

Bret 9:47
It is. Yeah, it's a great city.

Heather 9:50
What do you think about the reported low death rates in China? Could they really hide it if they were more deaths could their immune systems have been prepped by a benign Coronavirus released before COVID

Bret 10:02
There are a lot of possibilities. I think some of them are sort of mundane. But let's just say, we have seen some evidence, I'm still trying to figure out whether that evidence is what it appears to be. But in any case, keep your eye on this space. And we will talk about it as we figure out what it means.

Heather 10:23
Yeah, I actually hadn't put Yes. Okay, so what we'll come to we'll come back to this question. But I'm gonna get to one of the interior parts of the question, though, could they really hide it if there are more deaths? Yeah, I think so. Actually, just just as I now, don't I No wonder how it is that any American no matter how big their social group would actually know, if case herds of COVID, or deaths from COVID were or, you know, deaths after vaccination, or you know, any of these things that we really want to know the answers to? How would you know if the numbers were being doctored? I don't think we could. It's just too it's just too massive population. And China's obviously even that much more massive a population?

Bret 11:06
No, I think if I think unfortunately, absent, it would be fortunate, if there were no censorship campaign, the censorship campaign makes it impossible for doctors, for example, to realize that they're all seeing the same thing. And that though, each doctor may have three anomalies, and they can't you know what that means that the sum total of all doctors, having those anomalies is a signal of something. And so this is part of what we were talking about in the first part of the the livestream here is that the enforced formal conformity is causing the impression that these things are truer than they are. And this is why victims have to be able to find each other, you know, having Facebook, delete groups of people who believe they've been injured by vaccines, is incredibly immoral. I mean, for one thing, think about imagine that you were harmed by a vaccine, and you have some new debilitating symptom. And there were others who were in the same situation, you have a right to talk to them about what they're doing that makes it better, you have a right to commiserate with them, even if there's nothing you can do. being isolated from other people who are in your same situation is just cruel, frankly. And anyway, it is making it hard it is it is a deliberate intervention into the sense making apparatus that would ordinarily come from the fact that people have experiences and they talk about them.

Heather 12:30
Yeah, that's right. Have you seen? So this this question remember came in before your conversation with Dr. Malone and Mr. Kersh? Have you seen the Pfizer Japanese biodistribution study? Dr. Bartel said that it shows that the vaccine accumulated in ovaries and other organs of rats haven't seen sufficient evidence of fertility effects. But is this especially risky? That was a high dollar amount question that we didn't get to last time. I think I think you guys pretty pretty well talked about concern. You know, there's real concern about bioaccumulation in the ovaries.

Bret 13:05
Well, and you know, I've seen we could steal man the point, you know, it isn't enough to matter, the sort of thing, but what I would say it's not be enough to matter. The nut. Yeah, I'm not saying it isn't.

Heather 13:16
I know, but I'm saying I've heard that already. But how would you know? Well, let's put

Bret 13:20
it this way. The fact that we are several times over, outside of the design spec of the vaccine, the fact that the spike protein does not seem to stick in the cell surface and turns out to be toxic on its own. That's alarming that's twice over that this vaccine is poorly designed, right? Down protein, not effectively stuck in the cell membrane. And so you know, even if it was perfectly safe, right, like, no, can't be perfectly safe, because we don't know the long term effects. But even if it showed no sign of doing harm that we had seen so far, which is not the case. But even if that were the case, you would still have to say well, we just got lucky twice, right? Yeah, two things are true and it doesn't seem to have a consequence, but in this case, the consequences alarmingly compatible. The harms that we've seen, right? Are the heart damage and clotting disorders and things are alarmingly similar to some COVID phenomena that appear to be connected to spike protein in isolation.

Heather 14:21
Yep. Okay question from the discord this week is what is the steel man argument against ivermectin? And I think there's a number of ways that could be taken right like what is the steel mat argument against taking ivermectin prophylactically against using ivermectin as treatment against discussing it

Bret 14:41
publicly? Like I I can't make a steel man argument against discuss publicly I won't do it. I would just argue but they're the first two I think I can write there is no argument against ivermectin. Right, right. point is it is a substance should it be applied, shouldn't it be applied, we can talk about the various cases nor

Heather 14:58
should scientists ever tried to steal man? A Let's not talk about that thing, which is on a list of possible, helpful or explanatory values. So that that possible interpretation, which is not what I think they mean here. I don't think we should even attempt to steal man. But what is the CMN argument against, you know, it being useful and safe, say as prophylaxis and as treatment as two potential separate things.

Bret 15:27
I want to take the prophylactic one if that's all right.

Heather 15:30
I that's the one that I have some stuff on. But go for it. I probably you and I are actually going to say some different things.

Bret 15:36
All right. So what I would say is, because of the way ivermectin is used on label, we don't actually know what the consequence of using it regularly for an extended period of time is. And it is likely to be negative, is it going to be significantly enough negative to worry about probably not the drugs safety profile is so good that extrapolating from periodic use to regular use is probably probably not going to result in a significant error, we're probably not going to get surprised. But if we could, and that's the problem. Now, the alternative is actually something that has been done in a number of the cases where it's been effective where it's been used elsewhere, which is the dispensing ivermectin on first symptom, even before tests come back. And to people who are in the same household as somebody who, you know, has had their first symptom. I think that there is a very strong argument for that, right, you reduce the likely long term cost of taking a drug, any drug, right, and you get the majority of the benefit. And the only reason I would have hesitancy about that being the best approach is that there is some evidence of symptom free cases that do damage. Now, I'm not sure that that evidence is going to stand up

Heather 17:07
damage to the individual who, who was always asymptomatic.

Bret 17:11
Right. And so my guess is that doesn't stand up all that well. But we don't know. And to the extent that that is possible, what it means is that somebody could get a case they could get damaged, and they would not be triggered to go get the drug. And that is the reason that I would say prophylactic, in spite of the unknowns about the long term, yes, is the way to go. But I would love to be persuaded otherwise. Because it would be marvelous. I mean, Dr. Corey, in fact, advocates that everybody should have it on hand in the pandemic, because, you know, COVID can strike anybody, including vaccinated people, and having it on hand. So there's no delay is the way to get the maximum value out of it without paying the price of taking it regularly.

Heather 17:53
Yeah. I guess I have two arguments against prophylactic steel manning the argument against prophylactic ivermectin, no one I mentioned in the first hour, which is that I think, I think it is actually true. That given that compliance is understood to be difficult for people to take regular things that you know, the sort of one and done or two when done with the vaccine, you at least know, right? Like you know that that number of people have been vaccinated and if the vaccines do what we're being told they do, then they are protected. You don't have to keep worrying about them. You don't have to keep worrying about whether or not they're doing what they said they were going to do. So that's one reason to you know, in general, all else being equal to prefer vaccine or prophylaxis you prefer vaccine I prefer vaccine. I've been waiting for a malaria vaccine for a long time. I've been on a lot of terrible malaria prophylaxis in my life, right? So that's, that's one thing and then the other is that with a particular So, you know, ivermectin is discovered in soil Japanese soil in the 1970s. And is somewhat quickly discovered to have anti helminthic properties. And now it is understood to have anti inflammatory properties, anti viral properties. One of the mechanisms of action that we understand it to have is that it actually binds to the spike protein of SARS, COVID. Two, it's got a lot of properties, right? And one of the things that we now know that we didn't know 50 years ago, is that our microbiome is actually a necessary part of a healthy human being a human individual is not a single thing we contain multitudes and you know, we're all of these things and you know what, what else is ivermectin binding to? And thus taking out of the guts such that you may be your your gut health is not as as good you're not you you're unlikely to get sick from SARS. COVID to or you know, get a worm or you know, scabies of the other things that are on label and presumably there's a lot of other off label things that ivermectin would work for to. Anytime you're taking something with that sort of broad spectrum is usually used for antibiotics, but you know, with That's sort of a broad effect, you have to assume that it's going to be affecting things also that you wanted your body. And so I suspect that there would be long term effects and microbiome problems and that you would at the very least want to be making sure to be eating a lot of ferment and, and, you know, otherwise taking in your sort of probiotics. But that is one that is one reason that you know, for any drug, I don't want to be on it for very long. Yeah. And this is this is my particular concern about ivermectin. Yeah,

Bret 20:34
I think the fact of its generality also suggests that it's going to necessarily do some things you'd rather it didn't do.

Heather 20:40
It's not only going after the bad stuff. Yeah. Right. Like it does. It doesn't care. Yep.

Bret 20:45
And I would also just as a final point, one thing that is, I actually noticed this in one of the studies that I was looking at that was not very effective. And I looked into the study,

Heather 20:56
this study finds that ivermectin isn't very effective.

Bret 20:59
Yeah. And it had two flaws that I saw. One was that it was quite delayed in the course of the disease. And this is going to be a general issue. But the other was, that the administration of it did not, it was taken an empty stomach. Now, this is one of the interesting wrinkles with this drug is that when you are taking it for a gut parasite, you want to take it without fat, because what you want it to do is be in the gut,

Heather 21:24
right? And you want it to be basically be able to find the thing that you're trying to target with, right, you're poisoning

Bret 21:29
your parasite. And so you want it to be where your parasite is, if you are trying to take it to prevent COVID, then you want it to get into your blood and you wanted to cross and so you need to it's fat soluble. And so it needs to be at a fat in order to cross. So this is one of the a it's a hazard of the studying it, you can get a study that doesn't show very much effect, because just use they don't know that one thing well think about it this way, right? If you're running a study, and you're trying to eliminate noise, an empty stomach is a noiseless stomach compared to a take it with food, right? So hamburger and peanuts what to do. Right? Right. And so you know, ideally, the study would be like an empty stomach, but for some fat, you know, a shot of olive oil, or whatever.

Heather 22:13
But the point is that we should have had the q&a shots of all

Bret 22:16
shots about and we could have drunk them every time. We said here's the thing, or something.

Heather 22:25
It's gonna be a very slippery studio before it

Bret 22:28
could be. But anyway, so I think I think actually, I'm proud of our team effort of steel Manning. This one I think, I think we've done all right, yeah.

Heather 22:39
Okay. Some so I'm going to these three questions all show up. are little similar. Actually one of these. The first one is from last episode, and then these next two are all kind of about what legal actions might be possible. So the first is some universities are requiring vaccinations to return to campus? Can one make a case for being prescribed ivermectin to be equivalent of a vaccination? And if you're denied, is there a possibility for a class action lawsuit? That's one. Two, I felt pressured on my previous job to get the COVID-19 vaccine, but I never gave in, simply have a bad feeling in my gut about it, who's going to be held accountable if this goes horribly wrong us? Because we freely chose to get vaccinated. So there's, who's gonna be held accountable? There's the legal question there. And then is there any chance to make a legal case against the CDC, the who NIH, YouTube cetera?

Bret 23:35
Yeah, I don't know. We

Heather 23:38
have any, like, I don't know the particular answers on any

Bret 23:41
legally speaking. I don't know, there's all kinds of stuff going on here, including section 230. And its implication for what's that? Yeah, it's this provision that immunizes, the platform's right. So anyway, there's all sorts of stuff about the legal questions and who isn't isn't liable. And obviously, the UAE is in their context as an implication for these things. Don't know.

Heather 24:04
But the developers, the r&d, the people who did the r&d on the drugs on the vaccines are not liable, I understand. Right, right. But except that isn't there something where like if an employer requires it as a requirement of work, and then if you get sick as a result of the vaccine, and their employer has to deal with your expenses?

Bret 24:24
I don't know. Yeah, basically, I'm just gonna say, you don't know on the legal front at all, what I can say is analytically speaking, everything that I have seen suggests that there is a very strong argument for exemptions from any requirement to get the vaccine on the basis that you are using prophylactic ivermectin, and that could be either of the two plants that we've just described. And the reason for that argument is that a, the apparent effectiveness is right in the ballpark of the vaccines and And that effectiveness is, I believe we already know, but certainly based on mechanism of action, likely to be much broader That is to say, people who have gotten vaccines may have somewhere in the 90% range. And that varies between the vaccines but a 90% range of protectiveness from the original variant. But they may have much lower protectiveness against New variants. And so, you know, the point is, we've got a trade off. Do you want broader immunity that is arguably lower than the vaccines, though? I am not convinced that that's a meaningful distinction. And that that if there is a meaningful distinction that it goes in the vaccines favor, but nonetheless, the number is high enough. The protectiveness number that we get from this meta analysis is high enough that yes, of course, but you know, it does require compliance, it's not as easy to certify as you got the vaccine requires your participation. But I, especially in light of the fact that there are alarming signals that seem to be in the safety data for the vaccines, it is very reasonable for a person to be looking for an alternative to accept the hazard that comes from using a drug off label. And that, are they if they are willing to do that, that that is the equivalent from the point of view of protecting the population of the college or whatever. I see it as absolutely comparable, if not better, because of the breadth.

Heather 26:33
Most of the questions today are on this general topic. But there are a few that aren't. With your collective knowledge, do you think you could start a homeschooling program to counter the institution's?

Bret 26:47
I don't really know what that

Heather 26:49
means. I think it means creating a curriculum that people could employ with their own children.

Bret 26:54
Like as the exclusive curriculum for those kids. I mean, obviously, homeschooling is possible. And I think we wouldn't be as good at figuring out how to homeschool is

Heather 27:05
now I think they're asking if well, I don't know. But I read this as not, could we homeschool our children? But could we create a curriculum that others could use to homeschool their children that would counter the garbage that the institutions are throwing at the children these days?

Bret 27:21
I think the chances of us being able to do it this week are very low, because there's just a lot of stuff going on. But

Heather 27:27
yeah, I mean, I guess Yes, but a lot of the power of the way that both you and I learned to educate while we were college professors was about the interaction. And so the curriculum itself is, is you know that the content is absolutely imperative. But it's also the engagement with and the enthusiasm for uncertainty and serendipity and noise and being outside and, you know, being able to sort of on a moment's notice going, Oh, what did you discover? Let's turn that into the lesson we didn't know we were going to have today. And so the you know, the the parents, the adults doing the homeschooling need to have that openness, but also just have enough experience themselves to be able a not to shut down inquiry that feels irritating to them because they don't know what they're doing. But also just have, you know, somehow gather enough experience knowledge such that they can address the questions of children with both enthusiasm and intelligence and not leave the children thinking questions. get me in trouble with my parents or questions make my parents look bad.

Bret 28:50
Totally. All right. All right.

Heather 28:53
Who is I have no idea what the answer to this one is. Who is the most highly qualified scientist or medical practitioner who does not believe ivermectin is an effective prophylactic?

Bret 29:05
Well, I don't know. My guess is there are some very highly qualified me he Fauci presumably, but but the way I am fond of the point that the doctor Cory makes on us, okay, which is who who has tried it would declare it non useful? That's the question. Right? I think it is very easy in light of, you know, if you haven't looked very deeply into it. Yeah. And you think this is just a rerun of some past discussion about some other molecule that was not that great. Yeah, that makes me feel Trumpy. Right? Then I would imagine a lot of people are on the wrong side of this one. But I would like to hear if there are clinicians out there who have actually tried it, done it right, done it early, have a large enough, you know, caseload that they can see an effect. I would love to know if those people have not seen the effect.

Heather 29:51
Yeah, I agree. What can individuals do to accelerate the succession from established social media platforms to emerging science Friendly platforms, individuals, you know, beyond spreading the word. I don't know, like, I don't know about it like a concerted effort. Well, the ministers were so newly sort of in the thick of actually having to do it. I don't know,

Bret 30:16
somebody on Twitter posted a reply to one of the things I had tweeted today and said, I think it was me maybe it was there. Maybe they did it to Matt Taibbi, I should have mentioned mats. Yeah, interesting articles.

Heather 30:29
So we'll put that in the

Bret 30:31
link in the descriptions. But anyway, somebody posted a question, what can we do about censorship? And this is actually really simple. I know, it's not the exact answer to the question. It's not the exact question you've asked. But in the case of censorship, we have an equation and it's very much like the equation of you know, the R naught value and herd immunity, right? If you make it your business, to take anything substantive that is being censored, and broadcast it so that the censor spreads it by doing so the censorship will stop. And so if we punish YouTube for trying to block sober conversation of difficult stuff, you do will either stop, or it will go extinct because other platforms will find themselves enabled by YouTube's obliviousness. And either one is fine. If YouTube wants to come to its senses, great. And if it's not going to come to its senses, then you know, you know, we will be looking at its carcass soon enough. So it's as simple as that, in some sense, right? behave in such a way that the sensors can't win that the scientific stuff that you're interested in, gets spread. And we will end up where we need to go one way or the other.

Heather 31:52
Sounds good. I have a feeling that might be the first time I've seen someone book a haircut appointment on a live stream. Yeah, related, fun Questor question. I don't know what the question is. tell you a fun question for Professor Brett Weinstein. How much hair Are you thinking of taking off some good hairdressers look after me But the trouble with curly hair is that it's always hard to say if one is going to come out looking like a poodle. Much love to you both.

Bret 32:18
Yeah, I gotta tell you look, I'm just gonna be honest with you. I have never figured out what to do with my hair. I've never figured out what to say to the person who's supposed to cut my hair. Frankly I would love one of those exemptions of those you know, it's guys really that have crazy hair but because they're accepted in society that their hair is sort of part of the package. I

Heather 32:37
call that the Steven Pinker exemption.

Bret 32:39
It's a stinking Steven Pinker exception right you know there there have been a number of these Albert Einstein Albert Einstein had won. Why am I forgetting the like the statistician who debunks bad science I think of his name at some point but anyway, there are a number of these people who have hair exemption and I don't seem to have one or

Heather 33:04
they filed young maybe the better at paperwork than you are

Bret 33:07
maybe they are or maybe they are maybe my hair is that much crazier? I don't know. I don't know if you know out there in video, podcast land, do send word about what the hell I'm supposed to do because I don't know. You're

Heather 33:21
ridiculous I'm a high school student and I've recently been appointed to a council overseeing the Ei curriculum in my district where can I find good di curriculum not based in critical race theory? so easily? boundary boundary Yeah. What is it what is it called the What's her? theory of enchantment, Chloe, Valerie ch le ba l dry she is amazing. And what she does is terrific

Bret 33:47
and it's so good and so thoroughly tested that it's not hypothesis of enchantment, its theory of enchantment, and rightly so.

Heather 33:54
Okay, can I take a moment to just say I think something though not not about that you're good. I think everything in this room has shifted over and like the table is not in the normal place so I keep trying to get closer to you and I'm blocking that so like the table is in the wrong place like the table has Mabel

Bret 34:12
was moved so that I could get Robert Milan and I totally

Heather 34:16
but I just like I'm just finally realizing that this is not me. But no, it's you know, it's not that the furniture and the room are not in the same alignment as they always have been before and it's not the room

Bret 34:29
as I've been saying since evergreen.

Heather 34:30
The room is the room.

Bret 34:32
In this case. Usually it is not. Okay. I'm glad I got it

Heather 34:36
off my chest. recommended reading on philosophy of science. Someone asks, I guess, structure of scientific revolutions by Kuhn and I never remember what the books by popper are. But

Bret 34:52
I inherited a two books set during the game be phenomenon of popper.

Heather 34:57
Yeah, and he's got me he's got Great titles and I just never remember what they are. Because they're bits like you can't please for me I can't sit down. I don't I don't read that fast. I don't read a whole book in a sitting anyway, but I don't read like the popper book, bits and pieces, right? really anything by popper and structure of scientific revolutions is a short, important book by Thomas Kuhn.

Bret 35:20
You need one caveat for popper? Yeah. At the beginning, popper did not understand Darwinism, and he was very anti adaptation and he came around later in his life. Yeah. But you need to you need to know it early versus late. popper matters a lot if your subject is over in the neighborhood of evolution. Yeah.

Heather 35:42
Which means that we should really be precise about which popper we're recommending, and we're not at all

Bret 35:47
I'm recommending late popper. Late Karl Popper. Okay.

Heather 35:52
We got a couple of asks to reach out to some people who without I'm not going to name who they are, but I'll just say that it's on the agenda. It's happening. Yeah, awesome. Yeah. I mean, you know, we're talking about yet yeah, what? What are your thoughts on modern footwear? I spent a lot of time barefoot since COVID and became very aware that most people seem to have shoe shaped feet, wouldn't it be rather to have feet shaped shoes much love? God, there's a ton to say on this. And by happenstance, we're actually about to receive some shoes that if they are as awesome as they are reputed to be then we may be bringing them to you in one of our paid ads in the beginning of some episodes in the future, because we we have exactly this concern about footwear. Absolutely. 100% shoes are transforming feet and not for the better and the more time you spend barefoot, I think the more time you spend barefoot outside on the actual ground, probably there are health benefits there that we don't yet understand. And yeah, more barefoot more time will lead to better foot health and better foot health is going to mean better overall. Health I think

Bret 37:07
Yeah, but really, this applies across the board, right? Close your eyes. It's your palette. It turns out if you go back to that what now seems like a million years ago podcast with Dr. Mike Mew, right we're just click less than a year ago. I know. The hyper novelty is wrecking. What's up.

Heather 37:25
Yeah, I think it was July of last year.

Bret 37:27
Yeah. But we were suffering issues. Now. You know, the patches on your elbows. Make your elbows weak. I actually I'm not sure about that. But um,

Heather 37:38
I was sorry, I wasn't listening. No, you weren't worried. Now the patches on your elbows. Make your elbows weak.

Bret 37:43
I mean, probably at a technical level. If you wear them long enough, you probably the additional

Heather 37:47
chafing probably wears out your elbow sooner. That would make them stronger. No the chafing from the having the patches on your elbows is good. I mean, your elbows are gonna have to work harder they're gonna wear out faster,

Bret 37:58
right? Oh, you mean the joints? Yeah, I was talking about the skin which I think will get calloused. It will become less effective, less flexible, but

Heather 38:06
no, I think actually your joints will wear out faster if you have elbow patches.

Bret 38:09
Alright, and you know how to test this. There's only one way Oh, good. Okay, large scale randomized control trial. We need $20 million

Heather 38:22
Yes, we do. And hey, guess what we don't we're not in a university so none of that overhead is gonna go to roads or library. No, it's gonna go to stick to the cat.

Bret 38:31
So to some some LEDs for behind the sword of Damocles that hangs can we can

Heather 38:37
put a little bit of joy to allergies.

Bret 38:39
Yeah, sure.

Heather 38:42
Okay. Discussing the power. This is where I am. Yes. Discussing the power systems that limit basic science coupled with the General 1984 theme makes me think of Robert Jay Lifton, eight criteria of thought reform, which I had not really known. I looked up and they look interesting. So that's Robert Jay Lifton, eight criteria of that reform, as scientism replaced science as a tool for value control. Yes, absolutely. I think it's going to be two weeks. Hence, when we talk about chapter three, we talk a lot about scientism, and how so many people confuse it for science, and are using it interchangeably. And that's, that is one of the points that and reductionism are sort of like these two parallel points like this is how things that pretend to be science end up gaining power and ruining it for all of us.

Bret 39:34
Yes. Yeah. I mean, and at some level, the thing about science is it's a simple non technical method. Right? It's a method that is slightly counterintuitive, but there's nothing high tech about it. And, you know, if you just take the high tech and you take the trappings of science, it doesn't work if you you know, throw out parts of it, because they're in Convenient doesn't work. You just you either plan the method or you're not.

Heather 40:05
I want to take a moment to go back to the altercation we were just involved in where we involved in now Zack and I were so Zack, your your position on when the Dr. Mike mew podcast is based on what you understand about your own orthodontic journey, isn't it? No, I was joking. I was just saying that the timeline doesn't really line up with anything at all. Yeah, no, it doesn't seem to end yet. I also think you're right. Actually, I believe I'm wrong, but cool. If I'm right, I guess I love altercations. Like I was just assuming you can hear you. Yeah, I turn on my mic. Excellent. Okay. All right, anyway, well, dammit, Zack, I think you're right.

Bret 40:43
stand out.

Heather 40:44
Okay. I agree with the idea that we need more generalists and identify as one to an extent. But what are some pads or actions one could take to become successful as a generalist? What can an autodidact do to gain tenure for like something like 10 year is a plus year school necessary? Like absolutely not, it's not necessary in fact, school is more likely to be neutral or negative than positive in terms of become a generalist at this point. I hope you'll pick up other skills like look at other skills completely outside of the domain that you're engaged in and learn how to do them. Yeah, like you mentioned that you build a table like we've got we've got the desk that we built for me back when we were in college still in the house sacks using it now. I've got a bookcase that we built like you know, we've learned carpentry, I learned pottery you learn bike building we actually have done much of the work on our own homes in terms of tile laying and and there's just there's just any number of domains where like take take a complete step outside of what it is that you think you're supposed to be doing based on how you identify and what your education is and how you spend your time when you are earning a living and do something entirely else and see you may not be able to pinpoint how it affects how you view the you know the particular specialty that you think is your main specialty but I guarantee you it well it just expands your brain into approach on problems more broadly. Absolutely. Do you know Zack what kind of time we're at at this point? Yeah, we are about 43 All right. So I'm going to do I'm actually so there's a ton of good questions here but I'm actually just gonna go and Twitter and see if there's more here okay, I'm sure there will be and I know there's a system and I'm not breaking the system but here we go.

Heather 42:59
I should probably start with one that you can answer and then look through for more would you discuss pragmatic challenges associated with the mRNA vaccines two challenges I see are that it is impossible to maintain their effectiveness to the storage problems alone and is bad policy to assume a one size approach for all

Bret 43:21
yeah

Bret 43:23
I do not think that I'm in a position to talk about this I can talk about how these ones appear to have failed I can say that the principle is sound and interesting as far as I can tell, and that you know it's especially desirable to have the ability to essentially put any protein into production quickly on a platform that works but dammit the platform has to work and right I'm not sure about the formulation of the lipid nanoparticles What did you say? The lipid nanoparticles What did I What do you think?

Heather 44:02
You said banana particles?

Bret 44:03
No, there are no banana particles involved as far as I can tell. They might have worked better in retrospect Yeah.

Heather 44:10
Okay, my computer is playing games with me. Cat there are a lot of good questions, but so much of them are about

Heather 44:27
just more and more on ivermectin. And I think you know, we've said what we know at this point largely. Here you go. What do you think about the Portland Police rapid response Riot team resigning 50 less pleased to deal with the nightly protests. Boy Yeah, so this you just told me about this last night or this morning? This brand? Can you provide any backstory? I don't really know anything. There's like one

Bret 44:49
person there was an off I don't know the story. Well, I cannot speak to the incident in question, but one officer I believe was charged. I Oh, I do know something about it. I believe that there was a riot. And officer, the claim is that he hit somebody in the head accidentally that they were using nightsticks and that somebody got hit in the head accidentally. I don't know if that's true. But the point was, the perception, I think, on the part of the officers was that the mob was effectively dictating that this person who had not intentionally harmed somebody was being treated as if they had, and so they resigned now on mass yesterday, well, the way to say that they resigned from the riot squad did not resign from the police. Oh, okay. So my sense less, that's less horrifying for Portland, let's put it this way. I don't want to take a position on this incident. I don't know anything about it. I haven't reviewed the evidence. However, I do know that nationally, we've been demonizing our police, this is insane that we need believes that this whole defund abolish all of this stuff is obvious nonsense. And I can imagine being a police officer and watching your country suddenly toyed with the idea of abolishing your role. And of course, you know what your role is, and that that's a preposterous bit of nonsense. And at some level, I can imagine being very impatient at this point. And to the extent, you know,

Heather 46:20
so now it's a hard job, and it's a risky job. And now it's a hated job, right? And the fact is, like, what,

Bret 46:25
there are bad cops, but when the country is playing with all cops are bastards. And you know, the municipal authorities are going along with it. Of course, the good cops are going to be terribly angry as they should be. And so my sense is, yeah, all right, you got 50 people resigning from the riot squad, because they don't want to be on the front line, if that's the way they're going to be treated. Assuming that the incident is as they see it, then I'm completely supportive of that. And the point is, that now brings the city to reckon with the problem that it doesn't have a riot squad because it's not treating its officers honorably. Again, I don't know that I can, I don't know the incident well enough to say that that's true. But I can say in the environment and the climate where we're demonizing our cops, I could easily imagine that happening. And hopefully it causes the police department, and you know, the city to wise up and realize, hey, we actually have to treat these people properly in order to have a force that will protect the city from frankly, a roving band of writers who's been added for much more than a year. Yep. Much more than a year. No,

Heather 47:31
no. Little since Saturday, right? end of May. Right? And of May. Okay.

Heather 47:45
What do you think of the idea that our culture no longer reflects our values? For example, freedom of speech is a foundational American value, but seems to be lost now in our culture?

Bret 47:54
Yeah, 100%, we've completely lost sight of our values. And we're, you know, we're having the equivalent of an autoimmune reaction against them. And we're gonna find out why those values were instantiated the way they were in short order, because civilization just isn't going to work without it's gonna be, it's gonna be a brutal awakening for lots of people that thought they were being clever. Yep.

Heather 48:20
seven weeks, seven weeks after the second Pfizer dose, I had a rare heart attack caused by tear in the lining of my coronary artery. I don't know if history of heart issues I did think, Hmm, maybe the vaccine, your thoughts?

Bret 48:33
Well,

Heather 48:34
I also would have thought, huh, vaccine,

Bret 48:37
right? I mean, especially Yeah. So here's the, here's the problem. Spike protein, binds Ace to receptor. There is two receptors all over your body in various places. This is one of them, right? circulatory tissue. And so is it plausible? That's bike if you could have gotten loose damages themselves and caused a weakness? It is at least I believe, mechanistically plausible? Does that mean it happened? There's no way to tell in a single case, presumably. But what's really alarming is that there appears to be resistance to figuring out whether this is happening. Yeah, we have a social contract issue where the idea is like, if I'm going to take the vaccine to do my part in order to be part of the herd immunity, then you need to do the follow up on the vaccine when you get a signal that something has gone wrong. So that at least I know what to worry about. Right? Right. That work has to be done. And if you're going to blind yourself to the negative consequences of the vaccine, then we're in a whole different ballgame. And, frankly, they're faulting us for talking about the signal that there's something wrong but they appear to have wildly exceeded the stopping conditions for a new vaccine with respect to a signal of a problem. So that's right. They're in breach of social contract period, the end you know what else you got? To do so, yes, I would say, you are well within plausibility to worry that that may have been the cause. Yeah, I don't think you know, there's no way you could know for sure. But that's a working hypothesis that fits.

Heather 50:16
Yeah, I I do wonder, this person is obviously alive, and I hope you stay alive. But we're beginning to see just a little first glimmers of, of post mortems, showing spike protein and lots of tissues where it's not supposed to be in vaccinated people. And I'll bet mostly those sorts of autopsies aren't even done as people are dying now. And so we won't know. Like we could know, Spike protein, you know, will be visible on on autopsy. But for them if if the work isn't done, the evidence disappears. If you

Bret 50:57
don't look for the evidence, you're not going to find it. And the I the impression that the evidence is being avoided rather than sought is growing clearer. Yeah.

Heather 51:09
Um, Do either of you have either you noticed any side effects from your ivermectin? Yes.

Bret 51:16
I don't think so. You know, I've sort of tried to pay attention to whether or not there's any gut stuff that's different. I couldn't swear that there's nothing but nothing. Yeah, certainly nothing. Beyond the most mild just, even just like a slight, maybe feeling that something is slightly different. But nothing like a symptom. You know, yeah. No, I

Heather 51:37
had a few days of gut stuff. But it was three weeks in. And it went away. So, you know, that was the that's the only thing. I thought maybe he did that. Right. But I mean, of course, of course, there are symptoms of diseases of drugs of treatments, that you are not necessarily made conscious of by your body. Yeah, that doesn't that does not mean that there aren't that we are experiencing side effects.

Bret 52:05
Yeah, that's true. And it is also true that we are probably hyper aware, because we know we're off label. And, you know, so one is vigilant to look for the science.

Heather 52:16
Yep. What about these hypotheses explaining so many deaths in the various system, more vaccinations at once than ever before, more old people who might die Incidentally, getting vaccinated than ever before? Nobody thought to submit to various before this high profile vaccine.

Bret 52:34
I don't think any of these things ends up end up being compelling explanations, they may explain some portion, but I don't. But for one

Heather 52:43
thing, the more vaccinations at once than ever before is inconsistent with how many more deaths from just the COVID vaccines, then, from 30 years of all vaccines combined, just combined. And I forgotten the exact comparison. But you're right, more so so that that doesn't work. Because you know, those most most of those vaccines, you know, every every school child gets it or you know, like, yeah, multiple times. Right. But

Bret 53:06
I think the answer is, it is not. I don't think a large number of vaccinations is consistent. The idea that nobody thought to submit these things before, in principle is capable of explaining such a thing. But it is not in practice, likely, because for one thing, we know that there's been an awful lot of pressure not to submit them. Yeah, this case, because the, you know, there's this belief that getting everybody vaccinated is the key to getting us out of COVID. And so anyway, I just, it does not seem to push in that direction. But you do, you know, I think your thinking is right, you want to figure out whether there's some other possible explanation. And from what I've seen, the degree of difference in the safety signal on this set of vaccines is so far off of normal, that nothing like a bias towards reporting could possibly explain such thing. But anyway, I'd be very interested to know I mean, it'd be a huge relief, frankly, if, yeah, I'd be great. Right, but I would also point out the excess death calculation is not sensitive to reporting bias. So yep, right. So anyway, there you got more, but

Heather 54:25
do we know I mean, are there excess deaths post vaccination?

Bret 54:28
Yes. Okay.

Heather 54:31
What are your most current thoughts on asymptomatic transmission of COVID-19. So we had we had talked about a paper, many episodes ago, I have to look up where we did it. That was that was really the source paper for all of these media reports of asymptomatic transmission being really, really high. And this is one of the papers that I actually went through very, very carefully and found it to be basically complete garbage. I do not know if there is further work that is now being cited. I have seen no evidence of it. But I haven't done due diligence and tried to figure out if anyone is actually citing better work. Last I checked, which is well over a month ago at this point, that was still the paper when anyone was bring when when the claim that asymptomatic transmission was a substantial source of COVID transmission. That was the source that was being cited when anyone was being cited. And basically anything that cites that source in my estimation is not worth anything that that paper is garbage. I don't know if there's any new evidence,

Bret 55:35
I would say, there is almost certain to be pre symptomatic transmission 100% If you don't, if you don't code things, right looks like asymptomatic transmission. But as far as whether there's substantial transmission from people who never show symptoms, I'm doubtful on as you say, the evidence is compromised. Yeah, but maybe there's other evidence. Yep.

Heather 56:00
Um, I feel like we're probably at about an hour. And although there's a ton of good questions here, given the the format, it's hard for me to go through them. And I'm gonna find one more for us to finish. All right about that. Here we go. In Hungary, the government is fighting the woke agenda and canceled culture by fairly draconian means, including closing a university, censoring media denying block denying broadcast licenses and passing restrictive laws. I presume you don't agree with this. But in that case, what can be done?

Bret 56:40
Well, I'm not familiar with the example. Yeah, I

Heather 56:43
don't I don't know much about what's going on in Hungary.

Bret 56:45
Yeah, I mean, you know, the problem is what can be done as a, as a thorny puzzle, because so much of this violates the spirit and oftentimes the letter of our established principles and structures, right? You're not allowed to discriminate on the basis of race accepted, suddenly, it's become fashionable to do so it just in a, you know, new direction. And so anyway, you know, I guess this is a case where, until people remember what it is that we discovered, and how things used to work and go back to doing it. It's a hard question to answer because your question sort of presupposes a willingness to do something to solve the problem. But the solution to the problem is, don't do this new thing, right? Don't do this new thing. It's racism is still wrong, right? So anyway, yes. Let's not do this thing, because this thing is bad. And it's going to harm everybody. Yeah.

Heather 57:41
Yeah. So I lied. There's one more question Who, what role could zinc? what role can zinc and vitamin D supplementation play in reducing the severity of symptoms of COVID-19 because zinc, vitamin D, and also vitamin C are on a lot of the protocols, including the one from the FL CCC, the profile including the fl cccs prophylaxis protocol, which includes ivermectin and you're just there are a number of hospital protocols for over a year now that we've been seeing and zinc and vitamin D. And often vitamin C, as well show up on many, many of them. I don't know mechanism of action off the top my head or maybe I never did. I don't remember right now,

Bret 58:24
I did remember it for vitamin D, but I don't at the moment, I would say they're

Heather 58:29
vitamin D, of course, there's like nitric nitric acid distribution. So there's, there's there's a lot of interesting things having to do with greater cardiovascular health with more vitamin D, and greater cardiovascular health, just basically moving you out of comorbidity space, right, such that you're better able to resist, but and there's a lot of steps there.

Bret 58:51
I would say that there is an interesting site. It's I'm trying to remember there are two sites and they're linked together. One of them is IV m mehta.com. And then you can get from there to a much more general site, which is the one I was hoping to point to.

Heather 59:12
It's going to look it up. Yeah, IV,

Bret 59:15
IV M. matter. Okay, it's one. Yeah. And then

Heather 59:22
to show this,

Bret 59:24
you can you can show it and then if you go to the top of the, if you go to the top of the page, you can click on the different tabs. Yeah,

Heather 59:36
I feel like we showed this at one point early. So even hydroxychloroquine is on there. Yeah. hydroxychloroquine is on there. I don't even know that one. But anyway, my point

Bret 59:44
is vitamin D is listed. Yeah. And so there it is, you get a summary. This is basically a living meta analysis. The best studies are added accumulates.

Heather 59:57
I think this is not this is not a meta analysis. This is just a list a

Bret 1:00:03
was an aggregation of aggregate and aggregate. Yeah, yeah. Although there is some analysis to some of these tabs, yes. But it is not a formal meta analysis in the same sense that the paper we pointed to, but anyway, I would I would poke around there and see what the evidence is for.

Heather 1:00:19
I don't even know what some of these things are. And you know, always I would, I would, I would be much less interested in getting involved in these newer these newer synthetic molecules. You know, prefer prefer the stuff that shows up naturally in your food, but you need more of it than normally maybe in order to help boost whatever response you're gonna get. And ivermectin is not that, but it's naturally crying in the soil, and has this, you know, many decades long safety record, as opposed to for instance, I mean, this is a place where actually, you know, I, and I think YouTube but I disagree with Steve Kirsch, for instance that fluvoxamine. I don't I certainly don't want our kids and your new fluvoxamine and I don't

Bret 1:01:03
know. So Steve and I talked about that. Okay. The point is, if you have COVID, it's worth a brief course. Potentially,

Heather 1:01:13
I just said that antidepressant SSRIs are dangerous at any speed.

Bret 1:01:18
Well, I agree. On the other hand, so I would prefer to use ivermectin in the case, then it's functional. But I think the point is, a ivermectin is the only one that has been demonstrated to be prophylactically effective, but having a small arsenal of things I also wouldn't want to take for sure. I wouldn't want to take the level of melatonin as much as melatonin seems to be a comparatively safe drug at the scale that it is recommended to deal with COVID is like six milligrams is a huge amount of God, right? And so So my point is, you know, you don't want to do that unless you have to, but if you're sick with COVID, and it's, you know, about the rampage through your tissues, then being very, very, very, very sleepy is, you know, maybe a small price.

Heather 1:02:07
Yeah, I'd still rather take a ridiculous amount of melatonin than any amount of SSRIs.

Bret 1:02:13
Agreed. And I believe that the mechanism of action in this case has to do with platelets, interestingly, for melatonin, no for fluvoxamine, but

Heather 1:02:23
anyway. All right, well, I think at last, we have arrived arrived at the very our the end of our first day of Odyssey live streaming. We thank you again for being with us here and encourage you to join us on either of our Patreon or both of them you can get access to the discord server there you can write to the dark wars moderator at Dark Horse dot moderator@gmail.com for logistical questions and I'm sure I'm forgetting lots of stuff but I guess you know, spread the news not just about what we're doing here but also about where we now live. So you know, Share, share this channel as well and the clips channel so our our amazing clips guy will begin creating clips and putting them to the new channel ASAP.

Bret 1:03:13
And I should have said on our mainstream, subscribe to this channel, like this channel, spread it around that is important and we need to establish a foothold here because the sword of Damocles continues to hang over the dark horse. All right. Well, everyone

This transcript was generated by https://otter.ai