Bret 0:15
Hey folks, welcome back to the Dark Horse podcast live stream q&a where cats are disappointed that they are not getting cream this week. But we had an incident last week in which a cat nearly threw up on camera and nobody needs that. So we are, we are retooling our

Heather 0:33
cat, everyone loses because of the behavior of one bad cat.

Bret 0:37
Yeah, I don't really blame them. But

Heather 0:38
No, I don't. But it's sort of apropos. Yep, the the other cats are like what? We did nothing wrong. We've looked forward to our treats. What is going on here?

Bret 0:48
All right, well, yeah.

Heather 0:51
Tons of good questions this week, guys. And as always, we will pick up a few of them next week. But we will not we're not gonna be able to get through as many of these as I would like. So we're just going to jump right into it. Beginning with just a couple from last week. I see posts on social media making the claim that puberty blockers are completely reversible. This doesn't seem possible. But is there data on this? I don't have time to go look to see actually what the state of the literature is. But I can guarantee you regardless of whether there's data sets, or not, that puberty blockers are not completely reversible. I know it for sure. 100%. It can't be they can't be 100%. It

Bret 1:29
can't be because development proceeds down different pathways based on what hormones are present in your blood. And so that period of time in which you have blocked the hormones that wouldn't be there or added hormones that wouldn't have been there.

Heather 1:45
We'll do different things. Right, just talking about puberty blockers here.

Bret 1:48
I'm just saying in either case, the point is there's a developmental period in which there will be effects that are irreversible, that takes place so you know, it's it's a logical certainty.

Heather 1:59
Yeah, yes. And no, I have a lot more to say on this. Maybe we just leave it at that. If everything is unfortunately you can't wield that as a bludgeon because like, to evolutionary biologists said so as opposed to here's the paper. But it's, there's no way that this is going

Bret 2:16
to as if here's the paper was actually proof of something right?

Heather 2:20
If everything is a subjective socio linguistic construct, how can postmodern leftists claim with a straight face that their ideas are any more or less correct than others? I've never seen a postmodern leftist with a straight face.

Bret 2:33
I don't know what that means.

Heather 2:37
Straight like, yeah, slam postmodern leftist without actually saying anything. So they can't be like, Did you hear what she said about us

Bret 2:43
right. Now, but this person makes a good point. I think many of us have realized this. And in fact, if you look inside of the literature of post modernism, you will think you will find that Derrida and Foucault I believe it is Derrida and Foucault each make this point that effectively their point is this as a weapon. It their point is not that this is logically consistent, but this is used to destroy logical consistency in order to accomplish something. And

Heather 3:14
they never said more power to us.

Bret 3:18
Quietly to themselves. But yeah, the the very logical inconsistency you point to is there and actually, the degree of logical inconsistency across this entire landscape is so amazing once you begin to scrutinize things and try to take two ideas expressed in two different paragraphs and see how they live together. Yep. So anyway, that tells you the tale. These are not logical people attempting to accomplish something logical, even though they swear that they are

Heather 3:46
right. And people never lie. Do you think? What happened? Okay? Do you think the DMT being such a good fit for our receptors is an adaptation or just a coincidence?

Bret 4:03
It's not a coincidence. Yeah, I would say basically, you have creatures using So basically, you have hormones and neurotransmitters are molecular signals that signal from one place to another neurotransmitters over very short distances, hormones over long distances. But in any case, the lock and key nature of these things, allows messages to be transmitted, the messages can be altered, and the creatures that create hallucinogens often create them to disrupt the systems that are in communication with themselves triggering anomalous thought patterns. So anyway, no, it's it's an it's an evolution. It's an adaptation in the sense that either you build a molecule to send a message that is meaningful, or some other creature has built molecule to disrupt the meaningful processing of messages for two different reasons. So I

Heather 5:05
suspect actually did you say I don't actually know enough about DMT? What's it from?

Bret 5:11
I believe there are several things that produce

Heather 5:13
DMT. Okay. One of the toad ones, and

Bret 5:17
I believe there's a toad. Yeah. Okay. Isn't it also one of the components? And I Alaska?

Heather 5:23
Yeah, which case it's one of a bunch of vines or so. Right. Okay. So I suspect that the question is, what I suspect I may be wrong, but the what the person was actually asking, is not on the toad or the vine, and but on the human end, right. So clear, 100% and adaptation on the part of the organisms producing it that it disrupts us? And I guess the answer, therefore, is that, that it, it has to be,

Bret 5:58
it's like, it's like this and I spell it out. if, let's say that your enemy figures out how to deploy a robot that pulls your accelerator pedal to the floor unexpectedly in your car, right? Does this works, it's not, it's not excellent, but go with me. So your enemy has built this robot. The robot is an adaptation on the part of your enemy who's trying to hurt you by getting you to do something that you don't mean to do accelerate when you don't want to, right? The accelerators itself an adaptation for modulating the speed of your car to make it useful. And the point is, your enemy being hostile to you takes an adaptation that you yourself use to do productive things and causes you to harm yourself by triggering it when you don't expect it. So you've got a system that processes information with neurotransmitters. And then you've got a lot of things out there that let's say that you decide, oh, that plant looks delicious. And you start to munch on the plant the plants interest is to get you not only to stop eating the plant, but to remember not to eat the plant in the future. And one way of doing that is to take your thought process, which is normally well regulated, and lets you know what's going on and confused. So it's sort of like that. Yeah.

Heather 7:17
Again, something to talk about more. And actually, we do spend a little bit of time on entheogens in our book, as well. How to Well, this, this is from the discord this week, how do we overcome the understandable distrust of poor and disadvantaged communities towards relatively well off intellectuals such as yourselves, when cautioning against the dangers of radical societal change, it could be easy for them to misinterpret it as you're defending the status quo and your own relative privilege at their expense. Yep, good question.

Bret 7:48
Well, I would say, you know, this is why we frequently talk about the fact that actually even just hesitate to say objectively, but the the political compass test is objective in one sense, right? The questions don't know who is being asked them, right. And they render a judgment across any set of answers. And the point is, look, yes, if we were trying to prevent the system from being changed, there are two reasons that we could be trying to prevent it from being changed, either because we think change will make the system worse, or because we think change puts us at advantage, and we'd like to protect that advantage. But that's not the argument we're making. Right? As progressives, we are both interested in positive change. And you know, you don't have to believe us, we could be lying. But assuming we're not lying, if you ask us what system we would like to see emerge. One that is a great deal fairer than the one we've got. And actually, I think you and I would both agree that the system, while it does provide an awful lot of opportunity, and a lot of it generates a lot of wealth, that the opportunities in it are very unfairly distributed. And you know, the fact that the zip code you're born into has a lot to say about what you're, you know, the ceiling of success that you are likely to run into, might be tells you that the system is not where it needs to go. And so you know, you can, you can tell very clearly that we're not defending the status quo, because we're not advocating for the status quo, but we are advocating don't make it worse, you know, the fact that the status quo is imperfect, is not an argument for destroying it, because it is far more perfect than the alternative chosen at random, you know, something, something like that. Yes, we would like to see a system that is better, what does better mean? It means produces more wealth more fairly distributed, and is less destructive of long term well being. And, you know, assuming we're telling the truth about that, then it isn't the status quo that we're after.

Heather 9:57
Okay, we have a number of comments and questions. About about Portland. And this first one is a question. And there are a number of questions in here, but I'm gonna read the first one, we're going to talk to it and then speak to it. And then I'm going to read just a bunch of them so that we get through them. And then we can riff a little bit about on what we hear here. Sure. Okay, so this first one is you speak as of the setup. You speak as if the set of cleanup volunteers and the set of writers are disjoint. How much overlap is there? What does it mean if the overlap is significant? That would be fascinating. If it was actually the same people, and I would actually that would change what I think is going on a lot, but I see no evidence at all that there is any overlap. In fact of the I think I counted 11 different volunteers that we saw today. And one of the last two as we were walking back to our car, was actually wearing a black lives matter t shirt, and I commented to you Yep, I said, Well, that's a level there's a spider on the table crawling up here. Oh

Bret 10:54
my god, it's probably in

Heather 10:56
your shirt now. Right?

Bret 10:57
I'm cool with this. I like spiders. I doubt it's on my sleeve, though. We're good. Let me know if you see.

Heather 11:07
the one wearing loose pants. crawl up my leg. Okay, fast moving. So it came from here. So maybe it's done with me. Okay. There was a there's someone one of these volunteers was wearing a black lives matter t shirt. And I said to you, that is a remarkable level of cognitive dissonance to be here cleaning up from the riots, and then be proclaiming something that you're really I again, I don't feel like any of the stuff that's going on at the at the literal rioting and looting level in Portland right now is actually Black Lives Matter. It's completely tightly joined. And it's confused. The anarchists and the looters and the vandals and everything have confused people and want that to be their branding, but I don't I don't think it mostly is but but still, you know, to be like, Oh, you know, I'm for this thing that claims to be doing this destruction. And now I'm out here cleaning up the destruction seems like a level of confusion that I wouldn't normally expect. But really no one else that I saw a was wearing any of the branding. But also, I mean, these mostly were either young, like high school and like, cleanly, like, cleanly quaffed and sort of almost like properly dressed if that's even a thing anymore, like, high schooler and college age kids. And then like middle aged, there were there were a couple of middle aged Asian women. And it just it was it's not the same people who are out there. I mean, we weren't out there last night. But we've seen we've been out there. And other times, it was totally different from the people who were hanging out outside their tents feeling, you know, being however there being it's not them either, who's doing it the crap. I don't know, if they were involved in the writing,

Bret 12:42
it's zero reason to expect overlap. I do wonder, given your point about who was doing cleanup, if something has caused those with a public service requirement in high school or something to end up.

Heather 12:57
There were two different sets of T shirts that I saw on the volunteer it says if there are two different organizations, NGOs, some sort non governmental organizations of some sort who are sending out people to clean up. And yeah, the younger people all I don't remember, I'm gonna have the pictures, but I don't remember offhand. I think they were all wearing the one type of shirt, and then a bunch of the other people wearing something else. So there might be

Bret 13:19
Yeah, I will say maybe that one of the things I didn't I didn't capture it this morning. But one of the things that disturbs me most about the wanton destruction is how frequently things like trash cans are destroyed. And I think the point is, the instinct is to turn Portland into a mess. It is completely antithetical to the impulse to clean up after the mess, right? And so the idea anybody who likes Portland to be a nice place wants there to be trash cans that get emptied, because then there isn't trash all over the place. So, you know, do you want homeless people to have a better quality of life? trashcans contribute to that. Yes. Right. So you know, there's just no argument that this is complex, these are people who just see structure as antithetical and have set about destroying it and those who would set about cleaning it up whatever their impulse it is different.

Heather 14:21
Yeah. So just a few a few comments here and several more riff. One person says I went down I went downtown for the first time in over a year and my heart broke because I saw what they've done to my city, child like misdirected anger. I saw your street photos and felt I was watching guilty Portland parents cleaning up after they're poorly raised and right as offspring are they enablers. If a writer breaks a window in the forest, and no one is around to fear it are all cops still bastards. That is philosophical. Portland might not have all its ducks in a row, but it's cool. That's better get in line. This is a little worrying. I just want everyone to be aware that the insanity on the left has started screenshotting Super chats and using it as a weapon against the talent. I don't know what the evidence for that is, but that's not good.

Bret 15:14
I don't even know what that would mean but doesn't sound good.

Heather 15:16
I mean, I don't I so I get it. I see very little in our super chats that are bad, but please start a movement to stop cleaning up after Riot so people deal with the consequences. Mercy love you from our storytime here much of a story time is and then two more than we'll talk about any of these we feel like talking about. I appreciate you're covering the riots in downtown PBX Portland, as a resident of downtown. I find that more. As a resident of downtown, I find that most Portlanders are willfully question mark ignorant of what is really going on in our city. Yeah, I think so. One more? Why does the left media and Black Lives Matter martyr men who have been criminally violent towards women, and then never mentioned the charges? And that's, you know, a little bit different. And so let's definitely get to that one. But anything from all of those interesting and diverse comments about Portland? I mean, we spent a lot of time talking about and I appreciate. I always appreciate hearing from people who are well familiar with Portland, who were here. Yeah. And we actually got like four or five people that recognized us when we were down there today. And that was intriguing. Of course, you know, people who are interested in what's happening to Portland who live here are likely to have gone down and likely, right, so you know, it's it's certainly not a random sampling. But

Bret 16:32
no, but when we moved here, so getting recognized as a phenomenon of life, pretty rare, but Portland was the place it used to happen least when we moved here, at least of anywhere we traveled. And so I do think people, people are tuning in more. Yeah, locally, which is great. The the issue of people not really knowing what's going on in Portland, even people who live here is I think, huge, and it's not an accident. Yeah, part of it is COVID. Is meat a meant that people who might be downtown more frequently Don't go. But a there has been a concerted effort, which I've watched on the Portland subreddit to portray reports of Mayhem as false, as you know, slanderous. Yeah. And they're not right, the mayhem is real. And in any case, there's also an instinct to look away, right? For those, especially people who initially were excited about black lives matter because they didn't read the fine print. Right? Those people have been rationalizing ever crazier, ever more disconnected behavior. And it, it does result in the sense of like, why are we not, you know, why is Andy know, the source of information on what's going on with the rioters right? Now? I like it quite a bit. But the point is, there should be everybody should be fascinated by what's happening in a major American city. And instead, the press is complicit in not reporting it. And so what we have

Heather 18:17
is, so you don't mean why is it you know, doing this, like, why, why aren't there 20? Andy knows, right? So that we can get, you know, like, you know, we have we literally our 17 year old son's friend happens to be there last night, and we're showing video from him. You know, from what why is that? Where we're getting video, why isn't there actually journalism being done, right? There's no journal. And in fact, I was we aren't like, we're not journalists. We're not pretending to be journalists, right? It's not

Bret 18:47
our job, right. But the fact is, there is a journalistic vacuum surrounding what's taking place, and what is reported as reported in such strange ways, right? So I went looking for information on the mural that was painted on the Apple Store, because I wanted to make sure that Apple hadn't commissioned it, which I was sure they hadn't. But I wanted to make certain Yeah. And if you look at the reports, they're deliberately ambiguous, right? This person chose to effectively graffiti, the wall that Apple had put up to cover the broken windows. Now it happens, they did an artistically cogent job, right? But that shouldn't matter. The point was, maybe we decide that we like this mural, but the point is, somebody still decided to violate the law and put up a mural that spoke to their beliefs and not our beliefs, not Apple's belief, right, they chose to spray paint a wall. And anyway, in the reports, you have to read really carefully to figure out what actually happened, how that mural ended up there. So anyway, yes, there's a there's a completely bizarre field of distortion around The stories

Heather 20:01
I would I mean, probably the people who are in around Portland who are watching this, have done this, but I, I actually encourage people to spend time downtown in particular, you know, we haven't gone back at night, since the regular Riot stopped, you know, I just went down maybe a couple times, I think you went down one or two times more than that. But I have gone downtown many, many times in the daytime. And depending on if something just happened the last night I may Park up actually like at the Japanese garden, which is a fairways away and walk down. Just Just so I don't have to worry about like is my car going to be vandalized by the time I get back to it. And it's always changing. And it's fascinating. Every time it's an education every time you know the number of for a while there and the end of the summer, if I got downtown by you know, between nine and 1030 in the morning, I always saw shopkeepers out on the street, cleaning up the mess from the night before. And it's not the shopkeepers don't don't normally make sure to keep the sidewalks in front of their stores particularly clean. But this was a different level of cleanup that they were being required to do effectively in order to present a welcoming storefront that really should not have fallen on them. Right, you know, especially, especially in these times when so much has already fallen on small businesses. And I will say you know, I hate this trip, I've always had it since long before the pseudo left has been using it. But like, I'm just so tired. I just I just can't do anything. I'm just so tired. Like most people use this and like, stop doing all the stupid things you're doing and like, Get some rest, and then do the things you actually want to do and stop using this as an excuse. Right now people are legitimately exhausted, because of COVID like people are legitimately exhausted. And I do think that there are some number of people who if they went downtown, and they saw it, they would know something different than what they currently know. But they just cannot bring themselves to and it is about 13 months of unprecedented pandemic horribleness at all levels.

Bret 22:05
Well, I think there's an added factor. I've always been struck by the odd phenomenon of being embarrassed on someone else's behalf. When you see somebody do something embarrassing and you feel embarrassment on their behalf and your instinct is to kind of obscure what they're doing. And you know, and I have the sense that this is so

Heather 22:25
easy to believe in the dignity of human beings at some level, right? And you know, this

Bret 22:29
is shameful, right as a as a portlander. I want to be proud of Portland. There's a lot that's marvelous here, but I'm ashamed of what Portland is. Yeah, I'm ashamed that Portland is allowing this to happen. Right? And so I think many people who don't have our role are looking away, because it makes it less bad except it doesn't. What it means is that actually they're getting hoodwinked, that you've got a lot of people who are basically just misanthropic and to allow the misanthropes to rule to you know, create a bailout fund and all of this it'd be hard if you looked at what they're doing if you looked at what they spray paint on the walls, right it's hard to imagine what would move you to want them bailed out. Right right. I want them to suffer enough that they stop

Heather 23:20
Yeah, they're advocating murder. Yes, they're

Bret 23:24
openly advocating murder with a little smiley face. Yeah. Right.

Heather 23:28
So and so what finally on this topic, at least for this set of questions or why do we see the like murdering of men who have actually been engaged in violence against women like well I feel like we've talked about this a little bit certainly we have but I think we've talked about it some on air before and I am this is one of the things for me that just sort of tears The facade off Yeah, it's like you you know you don't care about women right? You don't care about fill in the blank like you don't care about any number of these things that you say you care about. Unless it serves your particular goal in the moment and then you can then you can make a claim that that's what you care about but no, it's it's true that there have been a number of men who have died at the hands of police who have been who have been separately engaged in criminal violence against women and we and there was one like New York Times like front page story I think which just spun the story of this guy. I can't remember any of this because I don't know which story it was. Which is buried buried buried. What should have been the lead, which was actually here this this person had been criminally violence is the guy

Bret 24:49
who I don't remember. Okay, well, we'll stay away from it. Yeah, particulars. I think I know which story you're talking about. And yes, the contrast between the actual story of The individual and the valorized version of the story that was presented to the public was

Heather 25:04
like when we kind of hit like, there are wrongful deaths by at the hands of police for sure. We can stand against that strongly and fiercely. I will re valorize criminal behavior. Well, why would we do that?

Bret 25:18
So I want to, I want to spend a little bit, okay, that's been I want to twist to get a different link,

Heather 25:25
turn it something.

Bret 25:27
Here's the problem. And, you know, Eric has done a thing where he's called the phenomenon, optical lynchings where, basically the point is, if something happens, that can be portrayed as the equivalent of a lynching, then it is grabbed on to, irrespective of whether the facts actually add up, right. And so if it looks like a cop has murdered somebody, then that's good enough, because what we're really looking for is something symbolic, we're not looking for a factual case. The point though, is, in a world where you've got people, let's say that they earnestly believe that police based racially motivated injustice at the hands of police is a rampant problem, right? They are looking for examples to point out what we all know is taking place. And the point is, how many of these examples have to turn out to be not at all the way they were portrayed for us to conclude the obvious thing, which is that the case in which a truly innocent person, a truly unarmed person is gunned down in cold blood? Right, is actually rare. Right. And so I guess,

Heather 26:41
and of those cases, the number of those cases that have a racial component is more bare, right?

Bret 26:46
So I think the point is, the question is actually pointing at the, the elephant in the room, which is it is the rarity of cases that are truly clean, and in which there is no ambiguity like this, that causes the cases which are so compromised by the behavior of the individual who's being valorized. To be so prominent.

Heather 27:10
Yeah. We probably don't want to spend a lot of time here. Yeah, there is. There's a messiness here, of course, because I'm reminded in that argument of the an argument that it's, you know, it's hard to bring a rape, rape a case against a guy if his victim wasn't perfect. Yeah, right. All right, if if she, you know, especially if she was a sex worker, but if she simply, you know, had a lot of hookups if you had, if she, you know, like all of these things, right. And, you know, the fact is that rape should be rape, with the understanding that a whole lot of things are being called rape that aren't actually raped, but like rape is rape, and it shouldn't matter whether you know, you how the rest of the world views you and whether or not that should have happened to you?

Bret 27:57
Well, I mean, I agree with your point. But I think the thing is, there's a difference between somebody whose record is imperfect, in which case, I do think it is fair to ask the question, you know, what disadvantages resulted in the person's criminal behavior? On the other hand, rape is a special crime, right? abuse against an individual, right? sexual assault against women, is a crime against an individual. Yeah. And the point is that if, if the allegations are true, then the point is, okay, this person, your valorizing, actually harmed somebody egregiously, and they had a choice. It wasn't that they stole to, you know, to feed a family, they actually engaged in sexual violence against an individual human, they don't deserve to be valorized this is this is the kind of crime for which there is no excuse. And so

Heather 28:49
it's it doesn't justify police violence, but there's certainly no excuse for valorization of the individual.

Bret 28:55
Right, right. Exactly. Okay.

Heather 28:59
Happy birthday, Zack. change the subject. Also, many thanks to Zach for clarifying my question about right to repair from the 30th q&a livestream. So Zack, you may know what he's talking about there. Alright. change of pace here. What are we at timewise? Okay, so we got a ton more great questions. So we're going to read a few at least a few more than before switching to the next to this hours questions. People who have been fully vaccinated can still spread the virus question mark true. Are there other examples of this outside of COVID? It seems like more scare tactics. So this is something just got stated today, right? Was it Fauci who I don't know someone just said this.

Bret 29:40
Well, this is apparently true. As far as I know, it's not all that rare, because vaccines are essentially never perfectly successful in preventing disease.

Heather 29:55
Okay, but But yeah, yeah, it seems to me that you just completed two things. If you were vaccinated, and you can't get it, can you spread it? So then so so you what you said, it seems like a conflates these two things and what fouchier, the who, or whoever saying this thing, they're not being clear?

Bret 30:15
Well, the evidence is clear, right. So I hope

Heather 30:20
that's true. Like, every time I've tried to go down this particular rabbit hole, I can't distinguish between these two possibilities, because they're not, they're not sharing it. So like if they are claiming that somehow this, this magic virus and this magic vaccine are combining in such a way that if you're vaccinated, you can't get the thing, but you can still spread it. Like I don't know what planet we live on. And I really want to see what those data look like. But

Bret 30:42
that's not that's not what anybody's saying, okay, you can get it, if you had the vaccine, you can get it and you're much more likely to be asymptomatic, because one thing that the vaccine seems very good at is reducing the severity of disease, which also reduces the degree to which you are likely to transmit it. Because, right, of course, your symptoms are a matter of the virus producing on the

Heather 31:03
other hand being vaccinated, you're less likely to be taking the same kinds of progression or measures to avoid spreading. And you are going to think that you're immune to it because you were vaccinated. And you know, we did a whole takedown of that crap paper on asymptomatic spread being really, really common. Yeah, but we still don't know. Like, we just took down that paper, we don't know to what degree is symptomatic spread actually can happen. It's clearly less than symptomatic spread. Yeah. But beyond that, we don't know. And so if you've got vaccinated people who assume that they're now immune, who's a small proportion of them are not, but are behaving as if they are, they will be if they do get it, they will be more likely to spread it than if they had not been vaccinated, actually, because they presumably would have been behaving differently. Yes.

Bret 31:49
And the frightening possibility here is if you have been vaccinated, you have been vaccinated against the original version of the spike protein, which means what are you likely to get what is likely to get around to the immune systems? vaccinated state is a variant. Therefore, if you spread it, what are you likely to spread some variant of vaccine? It's

Heather 32:13
not it's it's selective pressure for a vaccine important virus. Exactly. Yeah. Again, welcome to the arms race, right. Cool. Clearly cultural institutions like the ACLU and most universities Now, clearly, cultural institutions, like the ACLU and most universities were up for sale and bought by billionaire philanthropists, making honest academic scientists, doctors, journalists, lawyers, etc. hard to come by the court comment, but yeah, I

Bret 32:45
don't think that's exactly how it happened. I think there's a much more organic process.

Heather 32:49
Well, I think, you know, for sale is in quotes here, I think up for sale can mean a lot of different things. It can look a lot of different ways. A lot of ways there's a lot of capture that can happen without there being a placard on the door saying come by us.

Bret 33:00
Right? Or without anybody consciously attempting to do it.

Heather 33:03
Of course, yeah. Someone has asked how they'll handle a trade off of two risks. they'll respond this one risk is bad. No mention of the other risk. Can we come up with succinct? Can we come up with a succinct term for this non answering tactic? I love this question. I would love for us and it's possible it exists. So I'm just gonna read it again. So it's clear what we're at. I would love to have a term for this and maybe you've already got it. So if you're asked how to handle two risks, and or someone will call them Alan is asked how he'll handle the trade opportunity risks. And Alan is like, well, I really don't like that one. Like Alan you anything else? Got anything for me? No, Alan just totally ignores the second risk. And this person fell asking the question not Alan says, Can we come up with a succinct term for this non answering tactic?

Bret 33:55
While I'm tempted to say one side ism when the side is on, you know, because both side ism is a an accusation that gets leveled? Yeah, that those of us who try to make arguments about how something fits in context, so yeah, there is whatever the answer to the question is, the question is an excellent one. This is a repeated problem. And, you know, it's a kind of, it's willful of sophistry, because what it does, it's very hard, you know, if you're trying to balance the risk of, you know, your building burning down, versus the risk of, I don't know, being unable to escape from it or something. The by focusing on one argument, it's very hard to make a counter argument, right? Are you are you for buildings burning down, right? So you distill something down to an argument that is strong, but the point is, the argument is weakened only by the fact that there is an argument in an inherent conflict with it. On the other side,

Heather 35:00
yeah. So a longer a sort of DSM style term would be sophistry colon one sided variant.

Bret 35:10
Yeah. Trying to think Can we come up with a really good example? Trying to figure out what example we can use a sort of a type specimen.

Heather 35:20
I mean, I just feel like it happens all the time. You get people say, Well, if you're if you're talking about x, that means you don't like

Bret 35:28
like, yeah.

Heather 35:30
I don't know. I can't come up with anything right now. context. Yeah, it will occur to us, but I feel like it's all over the place. It's all over the place. Now that I don't feel like that's the hard part here all. The hard part is the succinct term. So I'd love to come back to this I don't know if we will remember to because we always have so many things for me to at least highlight this. With my synesthesia, to was blue, five is red, and zero is white. The first digit is blue. So the number is mostly blue with faint overtones with the other colors. Is synesthesia, adaptive, and what might its function be?

Bret 36:04
Oh, you're gonna love this. This is, I believe, this is David Eagleman his work I certainly learned a bit through him. But it turns out that the synesthesia thing where numbers have colors to them, is it's so it's so gorgeous, is apparently at least largely the result of toys that associate numbers with colors, like sets of blocks that have colors on different sides. Those foamy floormats Yeah, for me formats, for example. Yeah, that sounds like somebody is porn name, but

Heather 36:43
it's really bad for sure. Um, no, but if you've been a parent in the last, like, I don't know, probably 30 years you beat those those formats with the numbers that come out of them? Yeah. But I should I have great respect for David. And I don't know if this is his work. I know you love this, this hypothesis and sounds like there's evidence for it, but I don't. I don't know. It feels it feels it feels wrong. It feels incomplete. It may it may be in part and this is you know, this is where like the the lived experience with a personal anecdote, it's like yeah, but I don't think that explains what happens for me therefore. And so I mean, I just I don't I'm not saying it's wrong, but I think it's incomplete in part because those, I am fascinated by synesthesia, and there's a great novel I'd have to look it up about synesthesia that I loved when I read it that I'll try to remember to look up here when I was actively thinking about it a lot and I had exposure to a lot of college students I would ask people on a lot of people report mild levels and you know, it's not clear you know, if you're reporting mild levels like To what degree you just sort of clinging to vestiges of childhood or whatever, but there was never any pattern like I was I actually took notes for a while and I wouldn't know where to find them now but I'm like, what, what colors what, what colors people associate with what numbers and you know, age cohorts geographic cohorts? Like there was no pattern to what numbers and colors associated and so that made me skeptical on the other hand, you know, maybe there's so many block sets and foam mats, I don't know totally.

Bret 38:21
I do think the I'm hesitate to say sure without knowing the paper in question. But I do believe this this was a properly tested hypothesis and withstood test. I also think David had synesthesia or maybe still does. So anyway, an insider who for whom this resonated and who has the relevant expertise I certainly take very seriously but it's certainly an interesting explanation whether there are multiple explanations seems

Heather 38:53
like yeah and then and then that's also a very narrow form so you know as soon as these yeah adaptive like Like I said, I feel like it's it's the separating out of the senses that we experience as we age, it's actually kind of like a sensory a pop ptosis actually kind of like that. So a pop ptosis is programmed cell death effectively like you know, you start out with effectively webbed fingers and then the cells this tissue that you don't need between your fingers over time during development goes away. And you end up with you know, and we have this you know, overproduction of neurons in the developing brain in the same way and then a pruning down during early development and like through the ages, well through adulthood really, but especially early in childhood and a couple of different distinct moments and childhood. And it's not that it just you know, there was just too much like no actually more connection is better like more plasticity, more capability is better early on. And then you do get the terms catalyzed, you get you get, you get basically go down in particular canals, and I feel like I feel like everyone has some kind of synesthesia, whether or not they've recognized it or not early in childhood, and many of us retain at least a sort of faculty of ability to find it. Even if we don't like, I feel like I can find a lot, I can experience synesthetic things. And you know, it's like, it's like entheogens on call at some level. But it's, it never comes unbidden. And true synesthesia, it's the they live in this world where, for instance, two is two is blue, and five is red, and zero is white. But that, you know, the, I feel like that's just less cannibalization, like, you know, you're still more plastic and having some people in a population that have more plasticity in any realm. And in this case, it's sort of sensory failure to failure to fully separate the senses will have value.

Bret 40:54
Yeah, I agree. I also like the idea of called cognitive apoptosis, sensory, sensory apoptosis. Yeah, I think there's something quite right about this, that in childhood, you draw too many connections, you see things as related too easily. And that allows you to discover, you know, productive ways of thinking that involve pruning down. So I think it is very much that process. There is a savant, so in general servants, have extraordinary abilities and extraordinary deficits coupled. There's one savant, a mathematical savant, who is a synaesthete. There's a documentary about him, I'm trying remember his name?

Heather 41:37
It's not late Russian mathematician, Vladimir, I, Arnold, is it? Oh, no. Because that's the next question.

Bret 41:43
No, it's not him. Okay, too. But anyway, it's a it's a British guy, who appears to have no, I mean, he's got some quirks, but no major deficit and extraordinary mathematical capacity. And, anyway, so it at least, suggests that synesthesia can be compatible with extraordinary capability. But I would say in general, if everything we have discussed here is true, then synesthesia in adults is not in and of itself adaptive, but it can be part of adaptive ways of thinking. If it was adaptive, you would expect it to be universal. So it's,

Heather 42:18
well no, I mean, if it's adaptive in some circumstances, or if it's adaptive to have the variation, which was the argument I was making, just like left handedness is it's adaptive for some small fraction of the population to be left handed. Okay. So it could

Bret 42:31
be a lineage level adaptation right at the individual level, Probably not, but it is. It is compatible with adaptive ways of thinking, right?

Heather 42:41
Okay, Have you guys heard of the late Russian mathematician Vladimir AI Arnold? I sensed similar sentiments regarding the nature of science and how to go about learning from some of his writings May I recommend Arnold's swimming against the tide? I don't know. I don't know him but it yep. Next one, another lizard. That's not a lizard is New Zealand's to Atari. I'm a big head so I just needed to because here Zack just show my screen here. I of course have a slide from a previous lecture on Wow That's terrible.

Bret 43:18
We are working without a net. She always abandons us yes again, she didn't show for work now.

Heather 43:30
Oh, that's good. Okay. Oh, I didn't mean for it. So I'm Tuataras guitars, also known as B kids also known as rinko civilians Yes. To uttara is the Maori for I had it here somewhere I lost it oh it's on it's on a different to uttara slide of mine is Maori for spiny back i think is what second I have my screen back. And yeah, oh is the genus Spina Daan spines on back. And they are indeed not lizards but they are sister to the squadmates so they are there a Strout? Did I show a picture? Oh yeah. Is this a picture I just showed I think it is. This is a different one. It's a different picture. And I just screwed up this thing. Oh my god. Okay. This is a different picture, isn't it? Yep. Oh, so I was showing the wrong picture entirely. Okay.

Bret 44:33
explains why I couldn't make it out.

Heather 44:35
Okay. Here this is the one I meant to be showing goddamnit nothing is working. That is to Atari there. And they sure look lizardy right. They definitely have scales etc. But to pretend that we don't need all the all the details but they are not lizards and in part we can tell that because unlike lizards, they Don't have two penises. They don't have me beans,

Bret 45:03
right? Yeah. Yeah, in this case, the fact that they're not being lizards, it's really close. It's a bit arbitrary because the basil lizard was lizard like. And so we could just include that we could arbitrarily have decided to call the larger group that includes two guitars.

Heather 45:26
Yeah, yeah. Yeah, I'm looking for a tree. And I've got all sorts of trees with all sorts of extinct. Reptiles, and I won't do it.

Bret 45:33
Yeah. All right.

Heather 45:35
Yeah. Cool. I

Bret 45:36
didn't think guitars were gonna come up today. But

Heather 45:38
like, stop talking about squadmates? Which type of questions arise more naturally in you? Is it a what something is? or How did something come to be whatever you think it is? Thank you for the podcast. By the way, I look forward to your next episode every Sunday. very much a how and why. So what is really just a is a definitional, like identity thing, and easily determined and not that interesting, how questions are, are interesting. And a lot of the research that's that's done now is based on how questions sort of levels of questions of mechanism. How does the heart function? How does the bird migrate? You know, how does skin regrow after it comes off? But why questions are really the evolutionary questions, the so called ultimate levels of analysis. So, you know, why do birds and mammals both for chambered hearts? And, you know, why do birds with long childhoods have more efficient migrations than birds with no relationship with their parents? It's true, why? I am opposed to everything skin, I don't have one for skin.

Bret 47:00
Yeah, I would say I'm also thoroughly animated by why but I do also have a fascination with the border between the how and the why. There's something to be said for thinking ms mechanistic terms in order to deduce the answers to the why questions, you know, to give an example, early on in COVID, you and I were both struck by the fascinating fact of viral load in a room, predicting the likelihood of catching COVID. And the idea that even in a room in which there was COVID, if you were there briefly or the windows were open, that somehow you wouldn't cross some threshold, which does not fit with the model of immunity that we call acquired. But it does fit pretty well with innate immunity, where you have a certain number of cells capable of doing generalist immunological work that become overwhelmed by the number of particles they encounter. So as long as you remain below some threshold, your innate immunity works really well. So in any case, the point is the question, the fact that things didn't fit with the model of immunity that we typically think about, raises a question about what else might be going on at the mechanistic level underneath that is worth thinking about? And it turns out that there's a very rich answer to the question. So anyway, I love those things. Yeah. And I will say, I think evolutionary biology has been slow to wake up to mechanism for totally arbitrary historical reasons, which were when evolutionary theory began to be vibrant. Starting with Darwin, we didn't have the tools to look into mechanism below a certain scale. And so we got used to evolutionary biologists got used to thinking purely phenomenologically and not at all mechanistically. And then when mechanism, the study of mechanism caught up because suddenly we had all of these great tools, there was sort of a loss of interest, you know, are they interested in arise because it didn't sound interesting in evolutionary terms, but the interface really often is very interesting. And I wish both sides cared about it more.

Heather 49:19
Very good. One more question here, and we'll pick up some of these next time before moving to this our Super Chat. Why has any discussion of the vaccine nanoparticles disappeared? Did anyone discover how the particles break down on the body? Could they be causing the clots? I think I did not look into this but I think that the clots are mostly happening with the DNA vaccines, the AstraZeneca and the j&j vaccines, although six and 6 million is not it was it was it clots was it six and 6,000,006 point 7 million or whatever? Was it clots anyway, that's a whole other story. But anyway, the DNA vaccines don't have the now Particles deliver nanoparticles, which is part of why we were more excited about those. They still have the novel mechanism, a novel mechanism, but they don't have to novel mechanisms as the RNA mRNA vaccines do so, I don't know if clots have been associated with either Madonna or Pfizer stuff has been associated with them. I don't trust that we're seeing actually what the data are and what kinds of symptoms, you know, just just on an anecdotal level, I've heard from a ton of people who report like really severe rashes that don't go away, for instance. And I don't see that in the press. So why isn't he discussion, the vaccine nanoparticles particles disappeared? We're not allowed to criticize these, I think is the basic, terrible answer. Well, I also, I don't think we figured out what they do.

Bret 50:55
No, I don't think we've figured out what they like the particle breakdown in the body. My guess is there's not enough particles for the breakdown in the body. To have much consequence, it's not impossible.

Heather 51:06
Yeah, it's not going to be breakdown so much. But here's the

Bret 51:09
thing that I that I never hear discussed. The mechanism by which the RNA vaccines enter the cell is new. So two will be the distribution of cells that are entered and the reaction of the immune system to them. In other words, I think that a lot of the novel symptoms that we are seeing, are likely to be due to the haphazard way in which a bunch of RNA dumped into the body inside these nanoparticle envelopes, ends up entering cells and causing some tissue, therefore, to malfunction to some degree, right. So the point is, you're dumping these things into the system very precisely, right, you're injecting them intramuscularly. And that means that they will disperse in some way and some fraction of the cells they encounter, they will enter and those cells will start making spike protein and exporting it to their surface. And the point is, well, what symptoms would you expect? And the answer is that expect a bit of chaos. Yeah, that's not a very precise system. Right? You're not introducing it into a particular place where the cells, then pick it up and do something very coordinated, you're dumping enough into the system, that enough cells pick it up, that it resulted enough of the immune system encountering it that you get a robust immune reaction that creates memory. But this is like, you know, this is a bunker buster bomb, right? It's not a precision response. And how we discuss

Heather 52:50
Yeah, the lipid nanoparticles are the armor, right? So that they what is it the rnases, I'm not pronouncing that right, basically, that are circulating concentrate, don't get the RNA before I can get inside a cell. And so the armor is then just left in pieces floating around the body and hopefully, hopefully collected and discarded. But

Bret 53:09
yeah, well, yeah, I mean, you know, I think actually, it's gonna get integrated into cell membranes. Right? And,

Heather 53:18
you know, I like, like, plastic, micro particles and fishes?

Bret 53:23
Well, you know, at some level, the surfaces of these cells are liquid, which is why the lipid envelope works, right? Sort of, you have two bubbles fusing together. But you're doing this almost at random with respect to tissue, and

Heather 53:40
and are those are the lipid nanoparticles, more or less coherent under certain types of stress. Right, like, at the point that you get Heat Shock, for instance, you know, are they more are they going to be more resistant? and therefore the sales want Weiss when they should? You know, or you know, less? Like, there's just all sorts of possibilities. Yep. And we don't know. And we don't know the answer. That's Unfortunately, that's the answer. Okay, next question. A school in Australia made the boys apologize to the nearest girl for the behavior of men. justified by the idea of ubiquitous male culture, making all men responsible for the actions of few. does such a culture exist?

Bret 54:25
I don't understand that last part.

Heather 54:26
Yeah. I don't understand that justify by the idea of a ubiquity i think i think what is being asked is this was justified by this idea of ubiquity, a male culture that is ubiquitous. And we're in which men are all men, all men are toxic, basically. And no, no, it doesn't. Yeah, they're, you know, there will there will be some moments in history in some cultures, under times of extreme stress and War, when all Men are called upon to become toxic, right? Like that will happen. But I that's about it. That's about as close as I can get.

Bret 55:08
I mean, it just doesn't make any sense. Yeah, men and women are part of the same culture. And there can be subcultures in there that travel one route or the other. But not all men are toxic. Obviously, that has become a cliche, but it is important to say it in this context, and frankly, those kids are due and apology.

Heather 55:26
Yes, they are. Yeah, all of them. The boys and the girls. Yep. And an explanation. Yeah, just an apology. I don't speak as obviously, apologies have become weapons. And they aren't actually apologies. And we need to also resurrect apology as a powerful and necessary force for human interactions. Because this thing where you just apologize when the mob comes for you, I hope that it goes on to the next victim is not really an apology, and it's moving the it's moving the mob to the next victim. It's all it's doing. journalizing It's externalizing the mob, and it's and so most people now know that an apology isn't an apology, and we need it. We did it. And you know, when if the thing comes for you, and tells you that all you need to do is apologize and it'll go away. And it'll make dice with you don't believe it? And don't apologize. Don't do it. It's part of it's part of what we did at evergreen. Right. And in fact, I think, well, we refused to,

Heather 56:30
to do any sort of nondisclosure agreement. And the very first thing they asked for us when we got into mediation was an apology from us. We're like, I think we're done. What are you doing?

Bret 56:50
Yep, yeah, crazy. Yeah.

Heather 56:54
I don't see a way out of this. That does not include giving law enforcement permission to kill riders. Please tell me why I'm wrong. Florida made it okay to run over protesters blocking roads? What are your thoughts?

Bret 57:08
We can't do this. Yeah. But the fact is, there are tactical things you could do, it is impossible to do these to do what is necessary in the case of an anarchist force that is trying to precipitate violence against them in order to justify more of this. So we can't,

Heather 57:27
well, I'm reminded of a conversation you had early in the protests and riots. with someone who was who was, I can't remember police or or or military, who'd been called in, was saying they're taking all of our non lethal methods of enforcement away from us. And federal, Federal Police. That's right. And, you know, first before you even start to think about going there. Give the police back all of their non lethal tools.

Bret 58:00
Yeah, non lethal, they're less lethal. And that does mean, you know, well,

Heather 58:04
tear gas isn't lethal. Yes, also,

Bret 58:09
especially lethal, let's just say, I don't like the idea that we are held to non lethal, you've got people who are destroying civilization. And the fact is, it makes sense to use tools that allow the law to be enforced, and do not do more harm than necessary. But you can't let the fact that they're going to do some harm. stop you. And the fact is, I would be shocked if tear gas had never killed anybody. You know, just the simple fact that it's stressful on the body is dangerous to Saudi, that's

Heather 58:44
fine. The fact is, if they had they were calling for defunding the police and they effectively dead. And they got they managed to at least in Portland, get rid of most of the lesser kinds of control tools that the police normally would be using. And no one said you also need to disarm the police because frankly, even the even the assholes who are leading this thing knew what what happened then, if it was understood that the police had literally no arms. And so what they're left with is their arms, what they're left with is their most lethal tools. And yes, they need those. But wouldn't it be much better if they also had their entire panoply? So you know, fine, yes, all of these tools can be lethal under the wrong circumstances. But we don't start now. Having taken all of these tools off the table by saying, Okay, well, you can kill them. No, you give them back all the tools, and you actually start, you know, arresting and booking and sentencing. Some of these fools. Yes. Like, that's what you have to do.

Bret 59:47
Yep, I totally agree with that. Yeah, and I mean, frankly, if it were me, I would give a speech and I would say, the law has to be enforced. Here's why. It'd be lovely if we could do it without damaging anyone will do our best, but don't expect nobody to be damaged. Because this is the nature of the thing that we're up against. Here are the tools that we intend to use, they're not perfectly safe. You know, the wise thing to do would be to obey the law and not destroy property or attack people.

Heather 1:00:21
And that speech having been made, stop being so damn nice to the people who are destroying life for everyone else. Okay, thank you for last hours video of the coyote den. It's a nice diversion in these times. You're welcome.

Bret 1:00:35
Glad somebody liked it. I thought. It's hard to get footage like that. We got very lucky. Find the den and we were lucky to be able to get a camera on it quick enough because she wasn't gonna stick around. Yeah.

Heather 1:00:51
And we did get a picture right? or slightly a bit of video of the first kit being pulled out as well. Yes, we got it, which is in which the kit is more visible. So it's clear there's two of them, because it's different timestamps and all of this, right. Because I had I had looked in, and I had said, there's two I thought there might be more moving, but there's two and then when you look, you're like a mature, mature, there's too. I was like, gosh, I really feel certain. It may so and then and we know because we have we have video evidence that there were two there were only two there were definitely two. Yeah, yeah. Unless she was carrying more than one in her mouth at the time, which I don't think she would have done. And the first one which we showed you, the kid is screaming, screaming, screaming and in the in the one that we didn't show you which actually came first. It's quiet. Yeah, totally silent. Hopefully alive. Presumably, like she wouldn't have started there. Yeah, he

Bret 1:01:43
is making noises just not

Heather 1:01:44
sleeping. Yeah, thanks, mom. punk band Bad Religion did an album The gray race. Founder g gaffin is an evolutionary biologist. How long would it take for populations to breed to a new race? Would it increase genotype variation? So I don't know anything about the setup? I don't know anything about the album or anything? Yeah,

Bret 1:02:10
I don't either. I would say the thing about humans is that we have a special trick that allows us to behave like many species that we are one. And so it already you know, the distinction between betta wins, and Inuits is a huge gap in terms of how these two populations function as a species and beyond level gap, but within one species, so anyway, humans are nifty. And therefore it's, the question is, does the thing you're asking even makes sense, given how much human beings do within one genetic umbrella? It's, it's a whole different realm. And it would be worth trying to ask the question with the with the right sort of schema, but it's, you know, this isn't well understood in the field. So yeah, we don't have that set of terms.

Heather 1:03:05
And and and even if we were talking about rabbits, say, and therefore we just taught using the word population, rather than race like subspecies, which, you know, races or not, but in over a nonhuman space, we would be talking about different species. And time isn't a sufficient variable, like you need to know the degree of isolation size of the population, amount of immigration, emigration and mutation and selection on various characters that might further isolate like, yeah, you just you need a lot more that you can't, it can't just be about time. And then, you know, in humans, you know, some species is a is a dicey, it's a dicey term race is a dicier term. And it's a it's a largely inaccurate rendering of what populations are and with humans becoming global, as long as we did. It's a really poor map for actual population level differences at the genetic level.

Bret 1:04:09
Yeah, I would say the amount of time, given a set of circumstances necessary for two populations not to be able to understand each other would be a good proxy.

Heather 1:04:24
Humans Yeah, to not understand so language,

Bret 1:04:26
right?

Heather 1:04:28
Yeah. It's good. I know this word and I don't know how to pronounce it. Can you take a look? Are you familiar with us versus Cruickshank? Okay. Okay. The SCOTUS decision that acquitted white racists who committed the Colfax massacre and opened the door to Jim Crow. As part of the history of racist gun control laws stood until 2008. I know of it but not enough to say anything. I've

Bret 1:04:55
heard of it, but I don't know. But sounds important and Of course, it has to exist because to have liberal gun laws and constitutional protections, with as much racial tension as we have, you have to have some sort of mechanism for differential enforcement in order for the racist past to be what it is. Yep. So anyway, yes, there would have to be a history of this and I wish I'm surprised we don't know it, but we should look into it.

Heather 1:05:24
Yep. Could an ancestor to the current SARS Coby to virus be similar enough to generate an immune response to the current virus and different enough to be much less lethal? No, absolutely. 100%?

Bret 1:05:37
Absolutely.

Heather 1:05:38
Absolutely. theoretically possible. Will we ever know, a lot of questions here? Okay. Let's get to say three more. Sure. Oh, happy birthday. Zach. By the way, Heather, there are over 100,000 black bears in Alaska alone. I don't know include Alaska. North America.

Bret 1:05:53
just counted 100,000 black bears in Alaska.

Heather 1:05:57
That's amazing. That's incredible. I had obviously no idea. I'm ready to go. You do love your bears

Bret 1:06:04
do love bears.

Heather 1:06:05
Yeah, that's really cool. Thank you. I sit corrected. Referring to the earlier comment about activists screenshotting Super chats and using them against the talent, even if the majority of virtuous one person spending $20 to make someone look bad as a cheap investment deep platforming. Right. Okay.

Bret 1:06:30
I now understand the Super Chat part of it. And yeah, we've had a couple weird questions. But by and large, our community of people in the chat is, as far as I know, by far the best anywhere on YouTube. YouTube is such a horror show. And by and large, we have very good people in the chat. And yeah, we have very good moderators. Anyway, I'm, I'm proud of what we got messy as it is.

Heather 1:06:57
Okay. Two more questions. What is your current thinking on relative vaccine safety? Heather, I believe you said that you would prefer a viral vector vaccine for yourself. Thoughts on the recent blood clot stories? As a lot of questions in there, we already talked a little bit about the blood clot stuff, you know, I think it's again, it's like I hope that the blood clot stories are like the seatbelts in the car, the vaccine is still affording greater safety than then then damage. I think, pulling j&j or proposing that people should be cautious by j&j for six bad cases in over 6 million is an insane thing to have done. That's that those numbers make no sense. I still wish that we had many more years behind us of these vaccines before we were being expected to take them. We will be eligible to get vaccinated soon here in Oregon. And I would I hope j&j remains available, and that we can wait as long as possible.

Bret 1:08:05
Yeah, I would say the number of ways in which this is unsafe are many, and it is clear, and we are not having a proper public discussion about it. Gemini are having a proper discussion, but I don't hear it. elsewhere. There's the personal safety dimension. There's the safety of this vaccination campaign. There is the danger of the way markets are interfacing with the various vaccines on offer, you know, is there a perverse incentive driving the claim that we may need a third booster? Is there a perverse incentive that results in proclamations about the danger of one vaccine versus another? Is there a perverse incentive preventing us from discussing both the long term risks of these vaccines and the risk of affecting the pandemic in a way that will make things worse and not better? All of these things are absent from the discussion. And they exist only discussed on the fringe. And that's absurd. And in light of all of this, the idea that we are going to be forced with vaccine passports to accept vaccinations that have not been about which no one has been honest about the hazards is extremely distressing. It's diabolical, it's diabolical. And I would say, you know what, in a good regime, in a regime in which we did proper due diligence about vaccine safety, in which there were no perverse incentives surrounding the mythology about which ones are safe and how safe they are, and all of that, I would be in favor of vaccine passports. But I am not at all in favor of them in the context of a system that will not discuss rationally what the actual hazards might be. I don't think they're safe enough.

Heather 1:10:01
Last question, New York father pulls his daughter out of purely with a message to the whole school. Is the dam starting to break? Yeah, I have not read the letter. I'm aware of it. Certainly in the last month or two, from, from what I've seen largely through the efforts of Barry Weiss and Caitlin Flanagan, we this the problems with the wokeness in the elite private schools, in particular, only private, secondary schools, is coming to a head is becoming really well known in some circles. That said, the rhetoric that we see, in other places looks unchanged. As if, as if that's not happening at all. So I don't know. I don't know what it takes. I know that. Gosh, I think it was fall of 2019 that James Lindsay said that he thought it was happening. Dan was breaking people were becoming aware of it. So like, I don't think so man. Like, I think I just I don't think it's where you think it is? And of course it didn't, yeah, yeah. Well, I only continue to get worse. So, you know, there been a lot of these moments. And I guess I don't wanna get my hopes up.

Bret 1:11:35
Well, here's a frightening prospect. I agree with you, there are chances that we've hit bottom, you know, we've seemed like we might have and then things just get stupider. But imagine that the elite schools wake up, and the parents who get it, you know, and they're likely to be many successfully fight back. And then once again, we have another version of this trick that involves the distinction between private schools and public schools, right, where we underfund the public schools, those who can afford to send their kids to private schools don't suffer from having hobbled their kids in bad public schools. And it creates a self reinforcing pattern of the distribution of opportunity that nobody needs to own up to having created in other words, sabotage the public schools, privately subsidize the private schools so that they're better. And the point is, what is that? That's the wealthy hobbling other people's children, so they can't compete?

Heather 1:12:41
Yeah. I mean, it's it's kind of the opposite at the moment, like the private schools are

Bret 1:12:45
worse, worse, but imagine that they come to their senses. And suddenly the only schools that aren't insane, are elite, private schools, right? One can easily imagine that world because we've lived in it.

Heather 1:12:57
I guess. I mean, I guess I'm not sure why we're imagining the world, that is the inverse of the one we're in right now, which is plenty bad enough. And

Bret 1:13:05
because wealthy people have the means to erect their own system if they need to. And that, in effect, seeing a novel version of an old game would not be surprising.

Heather 1:13:24
Something that will need to happen. So it was it was a father, right, that pulled his daughter out, wrote this letter and pulled it out. And I think the dam is going to have to break with the mothers, if that's going to happen. And you know, you're you're imagining that this amazing thing happens. And then it becomes yet another reinforcement of class privilege. Yeah. Rather than talk about the dam, having the amazing thing having happened, and then one of the possible, immediate After Effects, I think, for that damned break the tougher parent, in most situations, to see this ideology for what it is and to resist it, and to be disagreeable, and to stand up to it and to say, I don't think so not for me, of course, I care about black people. This is really uncomfortable. Why did I just lose all my friends? It's gonna, it's gonna be mothers. And I think, you know, so far, many of the examples we're seeing, like Barry Weiss, posted a piece written by a teacher at an elite school on the East Coast this week, who's standing up to this a male teacher, you know, and these are anecdotes, but I think what we what we need for the dam to break is for more for more women to stand up and say, Actually, I'm going to change the, the expectation in the community that we don't do this, that this is actually the this thing that we are all on board with is actually the diabolical thing. Because that's it's it's much It's just going to be necessary if things are gonna change.

Bret 1:15:02
Yeah, so actually, it's I think you're making a very important point.

Heather 1:15:07
I mean, this is apropos. As you know, I think I mentioned maybe last week, and I've been, I've been asked to write this commentary on a piece on historical relationships between women, and men and women and men and all this, but like deep historical relationships between women and how it affects relationships today, I've been thinking about the different kinds of competition that men engage in, and that women engage in, and what that looks like when men and women interact, and, and how much we pretend that those that that deep history doesn't exist back when and, and, and to our, to our peril, right. And so so much of the literature is just insanely stupidly written the scientific literature, of course, because it always is it says things like, well, women don't compete. women say they don't like to compete, therefore, they don't compete women, when asked to engage in this, you know, doodlee competitive thing. So they didn't want to play therefore, women don't compete. It's like, Oh, my God, like, of course, women compete. Women compete all the time, just as much as men. But, but differently, and you know, in a word, it tends to be that men tend to compete overtly and women tend to compete covertly. And there were so many downstream effects of this, that are that are so important that it will also be and this is something I think this is new. I think no one has said this before, will also be harder to opt out of covert and overt games. Yeah. Then covert and overt competition, because as a man, you couldn't like say, Yep, not playing and you might get chided for it, you might get shamed for it. But everyone knows he's not playing. He's doing something different. Right. And if the competition is covert, it's all behind the back. And it's gossip. And it's sidelining and it's social. And you know, like, you can't just say like, I'm not playing Yeah, you're like, Oh, yes, you are. We're not going to let you not play. So like

Bret 1:17:02
she's not playing. Oh, that's a really good move.

Heather 1:17:06
Sometimes it will be Yeah, right. Sometimes Sometimes that is a that is a move, actually. So anyway, like I'm wrapped up in this in this space anyway. But I, in order for this dam to break, we need women who are somewhat dominant in whatever little social hierarchies they're in at these schools to actually make the move to make it, you know, to make it the desirable position to be standing up to this. Because until that happens, those few dads who stand up and do it are you know, are not going to make the difference? I don't think so

Bret 1:17:38
I think I just want to put three things on the list here. You've mentioned disagreeableness, which is more common. Exactly. I did so intentionally, right? Yes, is a necessary skill to say no, in the face of something like this. There is the question of compassion. This movement hijacks compassion, and compassion, compassion is going to be more easily hijacked. And women very likely, probably a more, more intensely developed skill, the nature of being female being one that requires this, you know, more directly for mothering, for example, right? And then there's the question about this distinction between males and females in terms of the preferences for the types of things they engage in. So the classic way to describe it is people versus things where men tend to be more interested in things, women tend to be more interested in people. And the thing is, people is a Yeah, the thing is, I said, I said it because I'm masculine. Now, the thing is that the world of things, is a world of conservation laws that is unforgiving. Right? And so the world of conservation laws is one in which one discovers that certain that an illogical system does not function, right. A world of people does not necessarily have conservation laws in the same sense. And so there's a question about whether there's a gender split here that might be setting us up for disaster.

Heather 1:19:07
Yeah, don't don't feel like you have to cut it short. I just have about eight things to say in response, you know, so there's, we've talked about, you know, being spinning, understanding something about the physical world as opposed to being entirely based in the social world and that, you know, that does map somewhat onto things versus people. And so given that is a, you know, well replicated psychological finding that men are and you know, including babies, including other cultures, right, like more interested in things on average tendency, and women in people and animals, right? That that would also suggest that many women have more of their entire life invested in the relationships that they have. And so it actually comes at a cost more a higher percentage of their life to go against the crowd, whereas men if they are engaged with these things that actually are meaningful to them, they go to their damn shop. Yeah, be like, Okay, well, I stood up to that and now I get to tinker or whatever it is. Is it um it's a caricature but it's not a whole world it's not your entire world collapsing. So they're just the I haven't actually found even the typical character trait by by gender that goes against this model like it all just like falls, which which makes it you know, this is the one of the few things I like God did someone really smart devices to, you know, capture women and then take out a whole society because the seems so deviously perfect to prey on many of the best characteristics of women and turn them into the worst characteristics for society.

Bret 1:20:32
Yeah, I mean, it's hard to even say these things out loud, but at some level this does, you know, the whole the whole woke ideology feels like it has dragged civilization into the dynamics of a a dysfunctional marriage. Right? It feels mean it just does. And I mean, I don't like saying it on the other hand, it's not like everything isn't at stake. We're actually talking about, you know, the dumbest policy proposals one could conceive of and yet we are entertaining them because nobody's in a position to say, actually, you can't abolish the police. Here's why. End of story. All right. That's what you need to say. Right? Sorry. Boston. Police. Not on the table. Here's why. So anyway, yeah, we need we need we need more disagreeable women. on it. All right. You can only be one disagreeable one. I'm, I don't know, I'm.

Heather 1:21:37
I don't know what to say. Yeah. All right. That is it. This is like chaotic, weird. day to day. Both of us really want to be outside. So we're going to encourage you to get outside as soon as possible, even for some of the night. Why not do it. In the meantime, subscribe, like this, this video this channel, the clips channel, to consider joining me and my Patreon and how they're hiring. Where right now you can pose questions that we may get to in our next private q&a, sort of drink bread at his Patreon. Lots more to be said but else do that. Alright.

This transcript was generated by https://otter.ai