Bret 0:17
Hey folks, welcome back to the Dark Horse pod cast live stream number 42. Part B and Part B is taking place on a brand new stream for some reason that we do not know YouTube suddenly without warning ended our prior stream and forced us to create a new one. So there are no guarantees here. We can say, however, that your super chats from the prior stream were captured. So don't worry, nothing was lost there. If you submitted a question, we have it. And we will get going here and get to as many as we can. All right. All right

Heather 0:50
step. We're going to begin with a few from last time. And two are the first is just a comment. I hope my sanity does not come at the cost of yours. Whether unity 2020 happens or not these podcasts are doing a service for people who think the world around them has gone crazy. Thank you. Appreciate that.

Bret 1:12
Yes, indeed.

Heather 1:14
Next question from Episode 41. Do you think that angiogenesis may be an ongoing process and that new life forms may appear near deep ocean vents, for example, without us noticing?

Bret 1:24
Well, if they did come into existence of deep ocean vents, I would not notice because I just don't get there very frequently. Well, here's the thing. So give me a little leaf here is is worth understanding. The fact is, there are a great many different DNA codes you could have. So you can imagine a great many different mappings have three letter code ons to the particular amino acids that they encode. So even if you had the accidental creation of a novel tree of life that use DNA, right, even if you just happen to land on the DNA formulation, you would still expect a different mapping between the amino acids in the proteins and the DNA code. The fact that everything on earth that uses DNA, so prions would be excluded from this. Well, prions are excluded in the sense that they reproduce patterns without going through DNA phase. But nevermind prions for a second, that all the plants, animals, fungi and other living creatures that we see, use the same DNA code tells us that they emerged from the same tree of life, if we found a version of life that used either a different molecule to transmit information or contain a different encoding, then we would have reason to suspect a new tree of life. So this is all to say, we don't have multiple trees, Darwin didn't know that we didn't have multiple trees. In fact, in the origin of species, he leaves open the possibility that there are more than one tree, we now know better, because we have the molecular techniques to identify that at least all living creatures seem to derive from one ancestor. But if it did happen, a they would probably blink out of existence very quickly. We don't know if that has happened. But we don't see evidence of it. And if they didn't blink out of existence, and they began to evolve, we would be able to detect that they were discontinuous from the tree of life. Because it would be very striking that they did not use the same encodings.

Heather 3:32
So I'm just I'm going to take issue with one thing and what you said, which is, I can't imagine why we would expect that a new form of life would have happened upon DNA. Oh, this is I mean, this strikes me as the least probable part of it. And you know, once you've happened upon DNA, independently, like staggeringly, staggeringly unlikely, sure, it might use different different codes from there on. But, you know, this is this is a this is a theme, of course, you know, that I explored in the science fiction that I was writing a couple of years ago, that has been sort of backburner for the moment but the idea of other evolutions of life in even within our galaxy seems actually very, very likely. But we will know that it is a different origin by the fact that it has a different what I came to start calling in football and information molecule. And, you know, why? Why would we start with the premise that, you know, even if it had the same DNA would have a different code, like just just begin with? It's really a new origin of life, it's almost certain to us to have some different molecule whose business is transmitting information?

Bret 4:33
Well, I'm going to take issue with your taking issue with my statement, because all I was saying is even in the unlikely event, that DNA was the core molecule, which would hide the fact of it being a separate evolution, we would still readily detect. So I'm not saying it's likely at all I'm just saying even in the event, that we are dealt the unlucky, confusing fact of a DNA based life form that isn't from the same tree we would still be able to see these things.

Heather 4:59
Yeah. For those watching, I will just point out that I have managed to con to our two younger cats, Fairfax and Moxie now on the scene into standing behind us and showing their their qL selves. That's them post cream meal. Okay, snakes have always been strongly present in human culture, whether as a force of good or evil. Do snakes in humans have an evolutionary history or link. So they there is no phylogenetic common ancestor between snakes that isn't the same common ancestor that all mammals have with all reptiles. That is to say, we do, of course, have a most recent common ancestor with snakes as we do with every single life form on the planet. And, you know, in keeping with that last question, there was only one evolution of life on the planet that stuck. We know that because we have this one information molecule that is in which life is coded the same way. With no exceptions being viruses. There seems to be multiple evolutions of, of viral code. You said,

Bret 6:04
Yeah, I don't. That's not what I mean to imply. I believe that all viruses that we know of derived from that tree of life most likely way is that they're effectively genomic escapees from a creature but they're not evolved independently.

Heather 6:21
Okay, well, that's what I thought you would said way back when we were first doing this, which struck me as very surprising. Okay, so we have we have just the one the one tree. And so you know, we're no more closely related to snakes than a kangaroo is, for instance. But the fact that many snakes, although by no means all, are actually capable of posing a remarkable threat to humans means that any rule that suggests that you should be wary of snakes is likely to be a powerful one and to persist in cultures. So we could say a lot more about this. Maybe you want to add just

Bret 6:56
Well, I just want to add that that snakes are very widespread. They're in fact, the most speciose clade of legless lizards that exists.

Heather 7:09
Yeah, and the most dangerous all of the other times that lizards have evolved lovelessness. And it has happened several times. Those legless lizards mostly keep to themselves. And when I say they mostly keep to themselves, they actually do that they did not suddenly emerge, well armed and Manchu people.

Bret 7:24
True. Yeah, yes. I'm hoping that a certain number of people are sitting at home wondering if they really heard us just claim that snakes were lizards, which we did.

Heather 7:34
Yeah. And that lizards lost their legs more than once, and only snakes really well, they kind of ran with it.

Bret 7:42
That's an odd way to put that. Yes, if you're curious about how snakes could possibly be lizards and what that means, I wrote an essay years ago, which you can find under the heading on being a fish. And so in some of your fish free time, you can read that essay and discover about the seals being bears and the

Heather 8:04
like, seals being bears. And one more thing about snakes and really, you know, don't, don't get me started, I could spend many hours talking about snakes. And I have in the past, wanted to get paid. I used to get paid to talk about snakes, among other things. Bow IDs, which is a group of snakes. That includes Of course, the bow was and is a fairly basil group. That is to say it, that family hasn't changed as much since all of the rest of the snakes have changed a lot as as the other ones have, actually, in their early development have a little pelvis and little tiny hind limbs and those things mostly or entirely disappear as when they're adults. But you actually see that happening. Developing and then disappearing. Yes, yes, yes. Yes. They never you never see post with little tiny legs right on the outside and see if you can seal pelvis and and femurs I think they don't have the the tibia and fibula. Yeah, yeah.

Bret 9:08
Boats, which are very popular in the pet trade. They're staggeringly popular. If I had a boat. We don't keep snakes, but if I had a boat, I would name it, David,

Heather 9:18
but would you what I would Yeah, and I would appreciate that. Okay. Yeah. Okay. Our ancient fairy tales and myths about monsters really warnings to kids about serial killers and child molesters?

Bret 9:32
Um, well, they are certainly well, ancient ones are certainly warnings about something and how they work. We don't know we could speculate and certainly some of these things might be warnings about particular dangerous details of the world. Make Eric I think it's this point originally. makes a point about evil step parent. mythology, which actually turns out to be a warning about evil step parents,

Heather 10:06
you don't say, right, I

Bret 10:07
do certainly get that.

Heather 10:08
That seems like quite a leap.

Bret 10:09
Well, I mean, I think the point is, evolutionarily, there's a very good reason for this pattern, right? Somebody's

Heather 10:15
step parents being more likely to cause harm to children, then then the genetic parents,

Bret 10:21
right. And you could imagine a woman steps into a man's life, he's got kids, she has no genetic interest in those kids. So in order to curry favor with the man, she would have to play nice with those kids. First, when he wasn't around, different sides of her might emerge. Sure. So the wicked stepmother is a resonant trope, because there will have been many wicked stepmothers in history, which is not to say that step parents are inherently bad. In fact, human beings routinely adopt other relay adopt children that are not related to them. Now, historically speaking, adoption would have existed and it would, in general have been babies or children who were related. But the ability to adopt offspring that are not yours and treat them very well exists, but the chances of a parent being a bad parent go up if the child is not related. I mean, I would point out that even our keeping of pets is effectively our ability to feel love for him to take care of a creature that is really not closely related to us at all. So that capacity exists, but it fails more often when children are not related. And the step parents situation, given the long lives of human beings, and the likelihood that one partner dies or something, the chances that a child will encounter a wicked step parent is fairly high, and stories that warn of that phenomenon, you know, give them a little bit of I wouldn't say an advantage but reduce the disadvantage of the situation and find themselves in

Heather 11:54
Yeah, I guess I would just add with regard to ancient fairy tales and myths, being monsters, about monsters really warning kids about serial killers and child molesters. Of course, there are also going to be distinct non human monsterous threats in each of the cultures in which such fairytales exist. And so you would expect the monsters to resemble something that is actually a possibility in the individual environments where the particular fairy tales emerge from,

Bret 12:24
which brings us to Komodo dragons.

Heather 12:26
Yes, it does. What do you want to say about Komodo dragons stuff?

Bret 12:28
And I just thought you were talking about playing my role.

Heather 12:32
Okay. Yeah, we just bring up lizards all the time. Well, somebody. Okay, the next question before we get into questions from the last hour, Episode 42 is from the discord channel. I told her I said that we would answer a question from discord once a week that they had voted on that they wanted answered. And here it is, what do you perceive to be the downstream consequences of the D stigmatization of sex work, particularly in young women. So this, this warrants, this warrants so much, and I will begin by saying that this is not exactly about sex work, but that I've got an essay that's that should be published within a within a few days. At this point, it's not yet out on the evolution of sex and the evolution of love and on what I'm calling a kind of sexual autism, which can be produced by by basically being an avid watcher of pornography. So pornography and sex work are not exactly not entirely overlapping. But this movement that calls itself sex positive, which basically says, you know, any sex at any time is inherently good. And sex work is inherently good, and we need to remove all stigma associated with it has clearly been named in the same vein, as many of these modern movements such that if you resist it, it makes you seem like a prude. When are you not sex positive? You sex negative? Do you not like sex? Well, no. So I would say and this is an argument that we have, we have both made that the so called sex positive movement is actually an anti love anti connection. And really, in a lot of ways an anti sex movement because it does move women especially you know, young women into a mode that is more like the one of one of the less honorable, typical male modes were other than us sort of being interested in a society and moving men and women both into a mode that is more likely ancestral female mode with regard to interest in long term bond and commitment and, and healthy and wonderful and surprising sexuality.

Bret 14:50
Yeah, I would just say, in addition, that the sex drive is among the most powerful motivators in the human Arsenal, and that the rendering of many readily accessible ways to scratch that itch is having totally arbitrary effects on society, it affects the way families form, it affects whether people are getting the right kind of emotional stimulation to feel healthy, it affects whether people are accomplishing important things that require, you know, striving and risk taking and all of these things. And basically, you know, because sex is fun, people want easy access to it, but easy access to it is interfacing with what human beings are in a very negative way. And it is I would think, is spectacularly disempowering of women that women effectively end up competing with things that provide satisfaction that don't involve any commitment at all, like prostitution, and like porn and things like this. And so basically, it it, it is rendering the meaning in life much less meaningful. So you know, that's a hard thing to say, because as you say, you're immediately understood to be a prude if you if you oppose this. And I would just say that the proper way to think about this involves thinking about tantric sex, which is obviously not prudish or sex negative, if that's even a thing. It's obviously extremely sex positive. But what it is about is about managing sexual desire in a way that heightened sexual pleasure rather than, oh, if sexual pleasure is good, then more and easier and you know, less, less meaningful. So you know that sex positivity needs to be reinvented as something that is actually sex positive, rather than just something that is in favor of more quantity of whatever low grade sexual satisfaction is on offer.

Heather 17:07
That's right, and you use the word if we had a one word answer to this question. You used it in that so the question again, just to wrap up, what do you perceive to be the downstream consequences of the D stigmatization of sex work, particularly in young women, disempowerment, disempowerment, of of women, and, and therefore, really, ultimately of everyone? Okay. Next question. Thoughts on longevity and or immortality? is death useful in the sense that it may push a sense of urgency? If given the option? Would you live forever? Now, it's a lot of questions.

Bret 17:42
Yeah. So this is a tough one. And nobody ever likes my answer on this, which is a evolution solve this problem Long, long ago. And the fact that you don't like the answer doesn't mean it isn't the best answer going, right. But evolution has done is it has solved all of the problems that block us from immortality or indefinite longevity, which is probably the better way to say it, it has solved them, by allowing you to take the part of you that matters, and to upload it to the next generation, minus the part that's no longer relevant. And so the point is, we do this, and we do it through the production of offspring. And those offspring take a tremendous amount from us at a cognitive and emotional level that's a large part of the meaning of childhood is the conveying of important concepts, skills, everything else, to creatures that matter? Because preserving your body and definitely a, it ain't going to happen and be it wouldn't be a good solution. Because for one thing, what is it that you think you know, that so all fired important that we need to keep your version of it around forever, right? You want to keep seeing things, we get that, right, we are all wired to want to continue to live. And so the idea that death is frightening and makes you look for alternatives to it is natural, but but the fact is, first of all, if you fix the body, so it could live forever, you want to fix the brain, which creates an obvious computing problem, right? Even if you get past the cellular level problems. The brain is built to remember a certain number of things and forget most things, and it's built to do so over a span of 80, maybe 100 years. We don't have a mechanism for figuring out how to forget enough stuff that you could live 500 years without creating a problem, right? So brains are going to fail. Even if we cured the body, the brain would fail for its own informational reasons. If you could cure the brain, what would life look like when you were young? You'd be forgetting so much stuff in order to leave room to remember that rare thing that actually was gonna matter in a life of 500 or 1000 years that you'd be unrecognizable as a person and I think the fact that anybody thinks that this is workable is a measure of their wishful thinking more than it is a measure of the tractability of the problem. It's not tractable. And what do you know, we already have a solution and embrace it, because it is the fact that your death is coming that gives life meaning and makes it precious. So, you know, treated as precious. And that the moment you think we really have to solve this problem, look at how most people live, right? Is there something eternal about what they're doing? are they spending their time in a way that makes you think, Oh, actually, every moment of human life is precious, and we should, you know, no people squander life. So I don't know, I think we just all need to grow up and get over this fantasy and realize life is precious, and it ends and the way to make that less tragic is to pass on things that matter to children.

Heather 20:54
Wonderful. Have you two so the answer to the first part of this question is I have not so i'm i'm gonna punt this to you. Have you heard of tourist tech in California? There are crystal, a lab grown solid state machine and its purported effects are intriguing, but direly needed study replication. They state that the Tech has a resonant field effect to improve cell growth, longevity and robustness. If true, could this have any impact on the immortality versus senescence telomere issue?

Bret 21:25
I would need to look at that. I must say the description there strikes me as not very likely. Yeah. But you don't you'd have not heard of it because I haven't heard of it. I can't I don't want to dismiss it because I don't know. But yeah, I'm skeptical.

Heather 21:42
How does the significantly reduced amount of ADHD and Asperger's and Amish communities compare with the overmedication epidemic? And the outmoded hidden curriculum in schools? Is it as simple as letting children be free range? So there's a lot in here, I'm not sure what, quote unquote hidden curriculum refers to here, I suspect. I have my suspicions about what it might mean. But I don't actually know that that phrase in quotes, gaps, so I'm not sure. But the larger question is fascinating, you know, is I didn't know so this is the claim. And the question is the Amish communities experienced lower rates of ADHD and Asperger's than do sort of general population in the US at large. If that's true, and that sounds likely to be true to me, but I don't know it to be true to what might we ascribe this? And so the two, putting aside the hidden curriculum question here. The two possible explanations that this questioner suggests is pharmaceuticals the overmedication epidemic. And basically over scheduling, I guess, I would say with regarding letting children be free range, and I would, you know, I think, I think that 100% both of these things have to do with failures and development that mainstream American children are experiencing at terrifying rates, that they aren't being allowed to take risks and live and explore and actually make mistakes for themselves, either actually, which is to say, let them be free range, don't make them have lessons, you know, every single moment of every single day. And this is, of course, speaking, absent the COVID lockdowns in virtual schools and such which changes everything. But then also, do not drag them into submission. Some, some people need some mood disrupting or enhancing drugs in order to live full a normal lives, we should always, always think very, very carefully before we give any drugs to children. And we should also think very, very carefully about what that's going to do for development. When it's something as powerful as for instance, speed, or an SSRI.

Bret 23:55
I would add that what we can say almost for sure is that ADHD, to the extent that exists and Asperger's are sure to be at least in part responses to novel phenomena. And those novel phenomena can be pharmaceutical in nature. But they can also be something like screens. And in fact, there was a very interesting study 10 years ago or so, that actually advanced to the hypothesis that autism was being caused by screen time, on the basis that it seemed to correlate with bad weather. The implication being children were indoors more and exposed to televisions, the idea underlying the whole thing was that by you're placed in front of a screen in a way that no ancestor would have been, you see a person there, they might be a face distance apart and they are emoting and talking but they don't respond to you and so in some people This would break the developmental process that would cause interaction between two people who were face to face from developing properly. So is that right? I don't know, but it's plausible. And then this will change. Now that screens are more interactive, right? television was a very passive environment for somebody to sit in front of. Now, these screens involve some kind of exchange of information you may be typing, you know. But anyway, these things will change over time. But the underlying aspect is the novelty of the environment, you are built to develop properly in an environment that looks like your ancestors environment. And the farther your environment looks from that or worse, the faster it's changing, the more likely you are to disrupt development and create, you know, dental problems, eye problems, emotional problems,

Heather 25:52
expect to culture, like the Amish are like Mennonites, who reject many of the hyper novel aspects of our modern culture, to of course, show fewer hyper modern diseases and pathologies as well. Yeah, of course, totally. poly genic, and multifaceted though it may be, could you please elaborate on why cognitive capacity should not be disparate across subpopulations due to genetic factors? I'm generally curious, please disregard if necessary. related to my last comment. Satoshi kind of Sawa has written a fairly persuasive argument visa V, differential selective pressure between different environments on cognition. Again, please disregard if this is risky. So I don't know kind of solid, you know,

Bret 26:38
nope. We're gonna get tangled over this again and again, and again, it probably requires a longer explanation somewhere. But the question isn't, Are there going to be differences in cognition based on differences in local environments? There will be will those be manifest in genetic, that is to say, heritable in the neuroscientific sense of that term? Will they be manifest there? Or will they be transmitted in a different way, which is to say, if you grow up in the Arctic, your cognition will be adjusted to the Arctic, but it will be transmitted to you in large measure culturally? Right. So the question is, do we expect a residual in the genetically programmed and hardwired layer? Or do we expect the differences to be passed on culturally and through learning? And my Ben,

Heather 27:35
which case they're entirely democratized? They're democratize what exactly? And

Bret 27:39
so the question is, could there be differences in the hardwired capacity of brains? Yes, there can be differences between populations. In fact, here's the bitter pill, there have to have been those differences. That's how we got big brains is different populations had different levels of capacity based on how much brain they had. And those with more capacity out competed those with less. So there's that except Neanderthals. Right? Well, we don't exactly know what went on with Neanderthals, but for another day, but the point is, yes, those differences can exist. Yes, they must have existed. But in the modern human population, where we are all one species, is it likely that populations have inherited substantially different capacity differences? No, I don't believe so. Will they have inherited some? Yeah, it's be very unusual if the answer was exactly zero, but the A, I wouldn't know which populations to bet on. And B. The question is, is are the differences between populations in terms of their capacity relative to our shared environment? Are those differences likely to be large relative to the part that is transmitted culturally, or small and my bed is almost unmeasurable? That would be my bed.

Heather 29:04
Please make unity long term. I need it. We need a manifesto of bipartisan issues, term limits, election tax and education reform, legalize pot, find and run 535 courageous patriots for every seat in Congress and start real long term change.

Bret 29:21
Alright, first, we need to get our Twitter account back. I appreciate it. Obviously, to the extent that unity is a resonant idea is a timely idea. It needs to extend well beyond the presidential election of 2020. No question. We do have a national emergency though. And so for the moment, we're focused on the highest leverage pressure point that we've got in hopes of getting us pointed in the right direction as quickly as possible.

Heather 29:51
And we might also actually come back to this question of whether or not we think bipartisan just says that there are people on on left and right that really want This these things term limits election tax and education reform etc. But the legalization of pot is actually itself strangely polarizing. I have I have begun to see a number of people basically making making the argument that because it is not fully understood in terms of its mental effects, that it should not be legalized. And it sounds very much like prohibition to me, and I, you know, it's not it's not where I fall, but I am just recently becoming aware of, sort of, but which I didn't ever predict, you know, we for years, were just like, never thought we lived to see the day when it would be common and legal and fine. And frankly, it seems like such a smaller deal than alcohol in so many regards. But there are there are those who oppose it. That's, that's, it's interesting to me, I don't I don't know much about that movement,

Bret 30:59
but on on the basis that we don't know, its effects, I must say, I'm far more worried about television and Facebook than I am.

Heather 31:12
And of the far end. I mean, if even if we just stick to, you know, exogenous chemicals, that we're encouraging people or allowing people to take into their bodies, let's go after pharmaceuticals, rather than something, a substance with which humans have 10s, probably hundreds of 1000s of years of history, and some ability, you know, maybe hundreds of 1000s is is considerably more than but I would say at least 10, I

Bret 31:40
don't know, you're gonna be 1000s of years of history, for sure. But the thing is, you can also modulate it, you can use the effects are ones that you are aware of, in large measure, and you can decide whether they're positive or negative, where whereas the fact of television and Facebook makes you think like a corporation, right? That's a hazard right there. And you can't even detect you're doing, right. And so I would just say, you know, will there be negative effects of people using marijuana? Yes, but we, we have so many of these cognitively disruptive forces that cause you to do self harm, that's something that has arbitrary effects is not the place to spend your time worrying.

Heather 32:27
And actually, I think that, I think, actually, if I were to point to a big risk of marijuana, it's that market forces drove farmers to create selective forces on the marijuana itself to increase the THC content so high, and simultaneously decreased the CBD content such that you have much more, basically much more ability to let a small amount get you high, but the THC tends to come with psychotic effects. And the CBD would tend to as far as I understand it, along with some other active molecules, we don't even have named yet for the most part, mitigating effects of the wait time step on the trackpad to get some of the other bioactive molecules in marijuana seem to in its less human selected state, mitigate the psychosis effects of the THC. And now we have such strong weed, that it's actually much more dangerous than it was back when, you know, back when it was becoming something that was, you know, increasingly widespread among young people.

Bret 33:34
Well, interestingly, it's not really even market forces. I would say that did that it was the way we punish, right? Because Yeah, it was it was criminal, you were the law. It was the law, you punish on the basis of the weight. And so

Heather 33:47
it was also about crossing borders. Right? It was, I think,

Bret 33:50
the same thing. So the point is, what maybe detection exactly but the you were avoiding the law, you made it stronger, so that less weed did had greater effect, which meant that when you were caught with it, the weight that was recorded was lower, and the chances of it being found crossing a border is lower. So that's the law causing it to be concentrated, which has now turned it into actually quite a powerful drug where it was not a powerful drug. So back when it began to be demonized. It was pretty mild. Yeah. And pretty manageable. And so to the extent that

Heather 34:24
far safer to sit around with a bunch of friends, smoking a spliff in the 50s, then sharing, you know, then each of you having a six pack,

Bret 34:31
right, yeah, I mean, you're less likely to get into a fight less likely to crash your car, all sorts of things. So the fact that a safe drug was rendered dangerous by our treating it as if it was dangerous, and now it's something that we have to worry about because actually the effects are substantial. That's an argument against trying to regulate it rather than regulating it into oblivion, which doesn't work and makes it worse. Okay,

Heather 35:00
I don't know what this one means. Do you know should I read it?

Bret 35:09
I have no idea what that means.

Heather 35:11
So it's a reference to Gator on the character on Twitter whom we know. Well, peloquin if you want to clarify, we will read it, but not knowing what this is about. I'm not gonna read this out loud. Okay? What are your thoughts on the social, moral and ethical implications of technologies such as CRISPR, gene editing becoming available and accessible to the masses?

Bret 35:36
Well, as I've said before, I don't believe we have the Rosetta Stone, we have the typewriter, but we don't have the Rosetta Stone in CRISPR, we will eventually have the Rosetta Stone at which point it becomes a very dangerous phenomenon. And as the price point drops, and it becomes accessible to more people, we're in danger. But the number of things where this is the case, you know, the relatively low price point to composite viruses and imbue them with dangerous characteristics is apparently already a level where you know, something well below a state level actor could deliver a huge blow. so dangerous, we have to rethink how we do all of these things, the ability for some entity to do something that is in its interest, where either the risk of it spilling out into the world and doing spectacular levels of externalized harm is there, or it could intentionally be weaponized. You know, we're gonna run into this technology after technology. And at some level, you know, just as we decide with the right to bear arms, that the right to bear arms does not involve your right to a bazooka or to a nuclear weapon. Right, we have to decide what we're going to do about the technologies that we cannot afford to be available to every insane person or criminal organization. You know, and it's not an easy question. It's, it's going to involve a new understanding of the legal limits have certain rights. On the other hand, all of our well being is depending on the ability to figure out how to regulate those things.

Heather 37:14
Yes. Was there resistance to the initial 1970s real life enactment of the Turner award play that started evergreens day of absence ritual, yearly theatrical performance might have sufficed as a learning device? I don't think so. So this is this is in reference to the the day of absence, and they have presence, which will that began, I don't know, when maybe in the 90s something maybe it began at the beginning. Oh, did it? Okay, so the original plays 50s, I think 60s 50s 60s. And then this day of absence, which was established to demonstrate the importance of black people in in the original play the town and on campus on campus, then got reversed in 2017, to much fanfare. Was there any resistance? I know, I've never heard of any resistance.

Bret 38:11
I don't think there was. And you know, what a yearly theatrical performance have sufficed. I don't know. You know,

Heather 38:19
I suspect that it might like if it was really just that play year, after year, after year, it might have become, it might just become too commonplace. Just, you know, just the way you don't, you don't notice your furniture, until something happens on it, or you move it around, or something like you need to actually move stuff, no matter how powerful and necessary it is in your life, you need to change it up in order to be reminded of its power and utility. So you know, you know, even just a rotating cycle of you know, that an art town and you know, just the number of other plays, but possibly, that were that were put on as part of this kind of analysis might have been, might have been powerful. And no, I don't think that that was ever part of the part of the scene.

Bret 39:04
Yep, I agree. And something to change it up would probably be necessary. But I agree. I mean, the whole purpose of a play is to teach something or to reveal something by performing it rather than Yeah, dragging it into the world.

Heather 39:17
Yeah. So next one, my vote is that you draft your cat for unity 2020. because presumably, he's willing to share his house with the world. That would make him a good candidate? I don't. I think he's not quite up to the job, actually. Next one, to what degree if any, is unity inspired by the Roman Office of console? Is this an office that you would like to see integrated or resurrected into our system? I don't know my Roman history well enough to speak to this.

Bret 39:47
Yeah. You've caught me off guard. It's certainly not consciously deriving from it. But I'll need to look into it more to to know whether there's something to revive there. I have heard it mentioned in a couple of places. So

Heather 40:01
what time are we at sec? 3838? Okay, we'll do three more here and then we'll skip to the next. Next stream. Is there a tie in with what is going on now and the dove and Hawk GTM game theory manifestation? I don't know what GTM stands for here, where the dove mindset grew to large and self imposed segregation. And now the pendulum has swung the opposite side with progressives.

Bret 40:33
I'm trying to map it onto that. Yeah, I don't I don't see it. I mean, I think what really happened is you have a, you have two parties that have taken up influence peddling, their influence peddling has resulted in people's well being, being absent from policymaking, which has resulted in suffering and the inequality and a feeling of anxiousness over what's coming, you know, people have learned that they are just sort of being carried along plank tonically, rather than being the, the objective of policy in some way. And it's resulting in lots of incoherent lashing out, right, it's resulting in the lashing out at immigrants, it's resulting in the lashing out at government, it's resulting in lashing out one race against another. And I basically think it's incoherence that we are seeing rather than strategies that are, you know, locked in some kind of battle. It's, it's, it's a, it's a loss of meaning and, and coherence more than anything else.

Heather 41:49
Do you have thoughts on Neanderthal predation and raping of early humans? If true, what would be the genetic legacy? And could IT support Brett's idea of gene seeking self replication at the expense of other? Well, I think that's not your that's not your idea?

Bret 42:02
No, it's not my idea. Yeah, of course, you could leave a genetic legacy legacy, you could also die out. But yeah, I guess I would say, I think there's an awful lot that we could learn if we had better information about what had taken place between those two sister taxa. But I don't think we do have good information yet.

Heather 42:26
Yeah. Final question from this live stream before switching to the next one. I'm from Peru. And in recent years, I've noticed that many American tourists come here to drink and experiencing an experience Iosco Why is this happening? Please?

Bret 42:43
Um, I think it's a it's a get wise quick scheme.

Heather 42:49
Not the drinking so much. No. I think it's, it's really two different. So there's the recreational people coming who are drinking it? Oh, hey, of course, I'm going to go do i wasco?

Bret 43:00
Yeah, at some level, it has become relatively inexpensive to do the traveling, people are very focused on what they can report back to their social groups. Of course, you know, drinking is just sort of a constant mode. And iosa is something you can definitely report back and people will want to hear what you have to say. And so it's not surprising that a people who are in a position to produce Iosco have discovered that they can earn by allowing gringos to partake and that be that gringos are interested in doing it. Because, you know, there's a kind of extreme ethos and I Alaska is extreme in this regard, right? There are lots of things that you can find shorter by Alaska, but people don't necessarily get real excited to hear about your mushroom trip. They definitely want to hear about iOS gear and they aspire to do it themselves because they want to be telling a story somebody else wants to listen to. And so anyway, I think all of this is a bit tragic, because I do think especially if one attempts to meet io casca on its own ground, right, its own spiritual context and I say that guardedly right, but the point is, those who have have wielded Iosco for 1000s of years have some insight into what is to be derived and how to derive it. And it is not necessarily clear that you can just simply create that scenario for gringos in Peru but the attempt is necessary and you know, basically you don't want you want the remote version you don't want you know, what would be the equivalent of Yeah, I went to Mexico but really what you did is you know, you went to come in Yeah. So, you know, there are those who are serious about these things. And there are those who are just finding a market opportunity and exploiting it. And it matters a great deal with hallucinogens, context matters so much, and, in this case, maybe even more than normal.

Heather 45:19
All right, beginning with Super Chat questions from this hour, check Chloe's tweet on James Baldwin. From his book The Fire Next Time, there are some similarities to your YouTube video speak at the devil. Also, please have Chloe on again, she's the best. I'm wondering if this is a new so Chloe. Valerie is a huge fan of James Baldwin as we came to now actually, when we spent a few days with her. When is when which is also when she was on the podcast. She's fabulous. And if this is this is a new tweetable easy to find. Whenever I see a self perpetuating dysfunction, I get suspicious, particularly when it happens generationally, and especially when in pairs. In contrast to mind viruses. Might some evils have two genders? I think there might be something very interesting here, but it's slightly encoded. And I'm not sure what, I'm not sure how to crack the code quite.

Bret 46:17
When it happens. generationally, and especially in pairs is this is about what's the term? codependency? Yeah, two dysfunctions that need each other. So I'd be curious what the examples are here. Yeah, I think the examples would help us unpack what that means. Yeah. But yes, it is entirely possible for something that is not viable on its own, to be viable in partnership with something else. And it is possible to pair to such things. So anyway, interesting idea. I'd love to know exactly what you're thinking about.

Heather 47:01
The militant moderate asks, the articles of unity YouTube channel ought to release a montage of people from both parties, claiming that will spoil the election for the other side, maybe collected from Twitter and Facebook posts, loved the chat with Governor Ventura.

Bret 47:17
That would be interesting, I must tell you, I think, you know, the whole purpose of the structure of unity 2020 was to achieve a kind of balance that would avoid spoiling. And in many ways, this has worked exactly as I hoped. In fact, it has exceeded my expectations quite a bit. One way in which I do not see balance so far, is that Democrats insist that this is going to spoil the election for Trump, even though the evidence suggests that if anything, to the extent that there is a slight bias, it draws more from Trump's supporters than Biden supporters. So it would tend to spoil at the other direction to the very tiny extent that there's any tendency of that nature at all.

Heather 48:00
The question claims that built people from both sides are making this claim,

Bret 48:04
right? I don't see the ones coming from the right saying that it's gonna spoil for Biden, right. So it's possible that that has something to do with the way what

Heather 48:13
you're saying, Yeah, but it was even because this this looks like this question makes it sound like they that exists on both sides, I would expect it to,

Bret 48:23
but I would expect it to also, if it exists on both sides. This is a great idea. And I would love to see it, but I don't want to portray in any way or magnify the degree to which the Republicans seem less concerned about this. If they do well, more power to them. I know what I think are to him, but more power to those who are not frightened by this particular Boogeyman, which keeps us locked in the wobbly.

Heather 48:46
You know, maybe the thing that I'm one of the things that I'm really excited about with regard to unity, and I don't remember the numbers, and I'm sure they change regularly, and I don't know who's most generating them. But the idea that a substantial fraction of the people who are voicing support for unity are people who say that they would not otherwise be voting. And to me that makes it seem like a critique of it on the basis that you will spoil an election that has to be between two parties is an inherently anti democratic criticism. It is

Bret 49:19
unpatriotic and anti democratic in the extreme. How dare you challenge anything that brings disaffected voters back into the process that is very much the way the party see things, but no rational decent person should see it that way. bringing people back into the process is part of how we reinvigorate it and make it work in the interest of the public. So I absolutely agree with you that it's like 25% Yeah,

Heather 49:42
I thought I thought I'd seen even in the 30s at one point. Yeah. Let's see. Is there an evolutionary explanation for phobias to lizard spiders, snakes, etc. And if it is, or used to be beneficial to fear them, Why are some people deathly afraid, while others aren't bothered Thanks for everything you do. So this question will have come in after we answered that earlier question about snakes. And I think it plays right into it that basically, most places where there are snakes, some of those snakes are going to be poisonous. And it's easier and safer to have an across the board phobia. I've been places where there were some very, very wrong beliefs about. For instance, one place, I spent a field season in southeastern Kent river someplace in Costa Rica suggested that bow was our baby cartel, it's a baby pit Vipers. And so if you kill boys, whenever you see them, you will decrease the population of pit Vipers. And of course, this has no truth whatsoever and the bow is there don't grow big enough to cause any harm to you. And you really should not be killing them. But people would hack off would have got bows with machetes whenever they saw them. And this is really, really unfortunate. But it did speak to this larger truth that actually they're the pit vipers, of which there were several species could be deadly. And, and they were dangerous and hacking them up when you saw them, although not something that I ever did, did probably leave more people around. If they manage their, you know, this, the spaces around their houses like that. I have this, I have this silly thing that i i say that i think is just in my anecdotal experience that people seem people who live who grew up like we did without having to be forced to regularly worry about organisms like this actually getting into our homes and causing causing harm. tend to have a phobia of either the things with very, very few legs or a lot, a lot of legs, that a lot of us don't particularly like spiders, but are quite enamored of snakes and vice versa. And I see no reason why this would actually be true. But I sort of enjoy recognizing this and people when when

Bret 51:58
I see it, yep, I am of the camp that fears things with odd numbers of

Heather 52:02
legs on numbers of legs. So after the cat has bitten a leg off a spider and then then you become a feared however

Bret 52:07
they get there. Yeah, I will say I think the general answer here is one of the magical things about the way our minds work and develop is that we may have a prejudice that's built in like there may be an underlying prejudice against snakes, because if you don't know something about a snake, there's a danger that it will be dangerous to you. And there's a limited value of you're encountering the snake and not worrying about it. Now, of course, if you eat snakes, it's different. So basically, you want to be able to reschedule these things based on where you are a general fear of snakes in a place where there's no dangerous snakes, maybe snakes are a safe food source and a place where some snakes are dangerous, but most aren't, maybe you need to get really focused on which snake you're dealing with and think about where you're putting your feet. So there's every reason to have the software be flexible. And some basic prejudice against things that are sometimes dangerous, like spiders, for example, makes some sense, it also makes sense for you to be able to develop a fear of something that comes to be frightening to you through information, right, like something you wouldn't fear that you realize is more dangerous than you think like, you know, you and I almost got caught in a flash flood when we were in Costa Rica during an early field season. So I've never looked at rivers the same way after that I you know, I saw something. But you can imagine the software is flexible for every reason you would want it to be and that means that you can get bad stuff in the software and you can be irrationally afraid of something that isn't really a hazard or is a hazard so rarely, like you know, airplane crashes that are so rarely that any do whatever degree you are dissuaded from doing something because you're afraid of being an airliner crash. You're making an error. Yeah. So you know, flexibility is good, but it leaves open the possibility of bad programming. That's arbitrary, and that's not

Heather 54:09
good. Yeah, no, absolutely. And I guess what just one more thing here. I don't think any of these examples that are given in the question lizard spiders and snakes and of course, as we said earlier, snakes are a type of legless lizard have the capacity to spread disease to us. I don't think any spiders can, but all spider had correct me if you think I'm wrong, but I think I think all spiders do have venom. So all spiders can animate but most of them don't do so in any in any way that's going to cause anything but a small slight irritation. And of course, most spiders are small enough that they'd be hard pressed to get anything into you. With regard to lizards, though, you know, that subset of lizards that aren't snakes, there's only one or two venomous lizards at all. So the idea of being scared of lizards in a Anyway is actually is the surprising one to me here and I say that as someone who's a huge fan of lizards, but it makes me wonder, you know, give sure they can that they have a bite and you know, you got to know how to handle them if you want to handle them. But I don't think that other than the one or two species I just can't remember if it's one or two of actually venomous lizards, non snake lizards. If they're not actually potentially vectoring any diseases I don't think they do so there's like there's lizard malaria and there's human malaria but I don't think like an Anopheles mosquito that bites one can bite the other and and transmit lizard malaria to humans. No, they can have they

Bret 55:36
can tear up your skin, some of them and cause infection, but they don't they're not vectoring disease.

Heather 55:42
I don't I don't think so. The lizard one is actually the the surprising one to me on that list unless people are, you know, correctly intuiting the phylogenetic connection, which I you know, I doubt, which is that snakes or lizards, and therefore just, you know, be wary of all the squadmates. Yep, yep. Have you seen Eric's latest tweets? Apparently he is in discussions with jack Dorsey about the Unity Twitter ban. He says it has reached the highest levels of Twitter Corp. Yeah, I saw one of them. And it's hopeful.

Bret 56:11
Yeah, I can't say I've seen them all. But I was up to date at some point before our stream, I was quite surprised to hear some of the things that jack seems to think Unity has engaged in, as I said, on our main live stream, it's a big organization. And so we're doing our best to figure out whether there's something that we should know that we don't know. But I believe Twitter has misunderstood what took place and that it has treated unity very badly. And I, I must say that at some level, I do suspect that there's something political underlying that even if we're being told otherwise.

Heather 56:51
So this regarding the our search for the name of a category of book that tends to be used as sort of a weapon to shut down conversation, I suggest you call the category of book Oscar Wilde defense, if you don't know why a book was written, it must have been written for a good reason. So I think that last thing is said, with some with some irony, and this, of course, is reference to Chesterton's fence, which we've mentioned several times. It's of course, too, too wordy, and it gives too much credibility gives gives too much to Oscar Wilde or whoever, and I was proud to read this insane book defending looting. But I like I like the thinking. And I'd like for us to find the category name.

Bret 57:30
Yeah, so I'm trying to parse exactly what's being argued here. This is somebody who clearly agrees with us that this book is preposterous, and is trying to name the category that we were looking for a name for. And so and so this, obviously, functions, the logic is the inverse of Chesterton's fence. Because the reason that a book is written is at least partially going to be because you can get paid to write it. Yeah, if it's a book that somebody thinks they can sell, and at this moment, a book that defends looting, and sell because there are an awful lot of people who are looking for somebody to tell them why this is okay.

Heather 58:07
No, I think I don't have it here. I think it actually came out in May. So so i think i think this was not written in the last couple of months. But it speaks to a moment that is yours long, although these last few months are, of course, fever pitch whenever to the moment. All right. I may be wrong about that. But I think I saw that in surprising if true. Yeah. Religion is literally false, metaphorically, true. Religious, metaphorical truth becomes outdated, so becomes maladaptive. Would it be a mind virus at this point, given that memes replicate and persist?

Bret 58:48
No, the category you're looking for is vestigial. And vestigial is a very overused claim with respect to morphological stuff. However, in this case, the question is, if religion is now maladaptive, and I wouldn't argue that I would argue that major components of it may be and maybe it is net maladaptive. But you know, there's going to be elements of it that are closer to timeless that are more likely to still be paying their freight. They're going to be other elements which are counterproductive. But that, to the extent it is maladaptive, a population that doesn't believe those things will have an advantage, and it will be driven out through evolutionary competition. So I'm not saying that is or isn't true, but I'm saying that would be true in the case that it was not maladaptive. And so that period of time in which it is ebbing, which I believe we are seeing that period of time, religiosity has been decreasing and we may be seeing people apply their religious impulse to things that are not religions. But that ebbing period would be the period of elimination of those beliefs by an evolutionary force. Over time, but what remained would be vestigial if it was not paying its way. Apparently the articles when they count, you should know that. Wow, wild.

Unknown 1:00:13
So you should all the followers and following is not replenished, but it will take time and the

Bret 1:00:19
animals interesting. So say it. So apparently we are being told by a not a small bird. I mean if he was a bird at all, it'd be a very large bird that the articles of unity account has just been unsuspended. So that's good news. I wonder what happened? And will we ever know I hope I hope we find out.

Heather 1:00:41
That would be great. Yep. So just to get back to my thinking that the book had been published back in May, what I had remembered was actually that it she claims it just came out on Tuesday of last week, but she finished it in April, which is, you know, consistent with a standard publication schedule. And, boy, she really got lucky or she really helped build rights fast. Okay, next question. Nope, wrong. There we go. Next, next question. Next comment. I am not a Democrat. I'm not a Republican. I am not a robot. I am seeking unity.

Bret 1:01:17
Hell yeah. But you didn't wait. Not a democrat and a Republican, not a robot. But you are seeking you. You did not establish that you are not a Russian. That is something else we have been accused.

Heather 1:01:29
But more. So the Russians weren't just Russian bots. It was actual Russians, bots. Russian bots. Just you know, for the win.

Bret 1:01:36
Russian bots for the win. Yes. And I can prove that I'm not a Russian by virtue of how terrible my impression of a Russian accent is. It's so bad I couldn't possibly be Russian. That's basically maybe you're

Heather 1:01:48
just a bad Russian

Bret 1:01:51
I I would think even a bad Russian I mean, a bad Russian if I'm to believe the movies and cartoons that I've seen as bad Russian would have a particularly thick accent. It would be readily detectable.

Heather 1:02:03
empty bottles of vodka littered at your feet. Probably. Yes, exactly.

Bret 1:02:07
And I viewed the the sinister nature. There being would just it would emanate forth, you would probably smell it. It's a cartoon. You don't smell much, but

Heather 1:02:17
but you can see the little waves. Yeah.

Bret 1:02:20
Yeah, sinister thought. Okay.

Heather 1:02:23
Whatever. Okay, well, let's gonna do a few more of these. I am currently reposting an old wingback chair and he tips. Yes, absolutely. It's actually one one skill that neither of us have any experience in and you know, there's a lot of things you could ask us about. Oh, you're about to know you don't

Bret 1:02:38
know that.

Heather 1:02:39
I think I

Bret 1:02:40
do. If I had a nickel for every wingback chair, I had re upholstered I

Heather 1:02:46
was anyway draw. I was gonna ski I bet you can't like describe a wingback chair. No,

Bret 1:02:51
I in fact, all I'm seeing is wingtip shoes, which I'm sure well

Heather 1:02:55
Do you want to know how to repost your wingtips? Yep. Brett is the guy for you? Absolutely. That might have we have no idea. No. I'm sure there's YouTube videos for that. Probably. Google, New York City crime statistics by race dot NYPD graphs Whoa. Oh show okay. NYPD graphs show 90 to 90% all crime by black and brown people. Does more crime create worse cops? Does less crime allow cops to be more calm? Isn't this the root of the problem?

Bret 1:03:33
First of all I wonder about those statistics. Yeah, that seems that seems suspiciously

Heather 1:03:38
way too high. But does more crime create worse cops? It certainly creates more stressed cops and does less crime allow cops to be more calm for sure.

Bret 1:03:51
So more crime if you fix the level of funding then more crime will create worse cops because police brutality is basically a substitute for proper funding. Right What do you mean if you fix if if we imagine if thought experiment was fixed the amount of funding

Heather 1:04:09
so you're not talking about correcting you're talking about fixing in place right which which many of fix you're using that's it that's a crazy thing you just said given the

Bret 1:04:15
normal meaning of the word fix there are in fact three meanings of the word

Heather 1:04:19
oh this is going to be good when it is spelled fix in place there

Bret 1:04:23
is to fix as in repair and then there is fixing your animal back

Heather 1:04:28
to being a bad Russian Oh, oh, no, I thought you were talking about fixing like an electron.

Bret 1:04:34
You fix your cat or your dog as anterolateral fix them.

Heather 1:04:39
It's terrible. Okay, let's resume that's you don't you don't mean if you correct police funding all hell is gonna break loose which is which is what it sounded like you said

Bret 1:04:49
if in our thought experiment if we hold resources constant, yep. Right. Let's say we hold resources constant at about the level that you that policing matches the criminality, so you're getting a good return on investment. And then we drive up the criminality. Yeah, but you don't have any more policing. And the point is, police in order to keep crime down, we'll end up behaving in a more aggressive fashion so that people will think twice about behaving criminally because they don't want to encounter the police. Right? So the and because

Heather 1:05:21
they're encountering they're having to encounter they're having to engage in more situations that are dangerous, and they are more likely to be hair trigger, or as a result.

Bret 1:05:30
So anyway, I think that the upshot of this, if we put aside those suspicious statistics, the upshot is, if you decrease funding of police, you will increase police brutality, that is to say bad policing, and you will increase crime. Right? Those two things are predictable outcomes of a decrease in police funding. Now it could it be that you have wildly over funded police and you don't see that effect until you get way lower. But that's not where we are. Because one thing is you have pointed out a number of times, police are being used to do jobs that really aren't inherently about policing like to deal with the mentally ill. So the fact is, police are overburdened. They may be improperly trained, they may be improperly armed, but they're overburdened and reducing funding without doing anything else is going to result in more crime and more brutality.

Heather 1:06:27
Yes. Do you believe that Democrats downplaying riots was or is with the belief that it would hurt Trump?

Bret 1:06:40
I believe that the rioters invoked Trump so that people on the nominal left would not be able to say anything negative and that basically this has become a get out of morality free card. If you simply put Trump on the other side of whatever you're doing, then most democrats can't figure out how to say you still have to cut it out.

Heather 1:07:06
So sort of leaving the dems with a capital D with no choice but to go along with that interpretation.

Bret 1:07:12
Right. And the fact is, I of course did have a choice but they had a choice but basically people are. People are on autopilot and they're not understanding that that autopilot may work for normal stuff, but it is allowing them to be routinely gamed now when people can figure out how to tie you in knots just simply by portraying them as opposed to something you don't like. And it's you know, can you figure out how to challenge the Patriot Act? First thing you have to do is realize it's not about patriotism.

Heather 1:07:44
Let's see multiple meow. I think that was in while we had two cats getting creamed. On Twitter, I talked to magga people what happens to them as they get mass reported by organized groups. Do you know why unity 2020 was suspended? Also Heather, please read my name. laughter is important. I'll fight you naked.

Bret 1:08:05
Okay. We do know that unity 2020 was reported by people. There are quite a number of people who are very persistent in attacking unity 2020 on many preposterous bases, some of these people are angry at me, I think for challenging the ascendancy of the woke ideology. Some of them are, I think, troubled by the possibility that unity will nominate somebody other than Andrew Yang or that Andrew Yang has, having signed up with the democrats is being taken as a sacred leader. I don't know quite what it is. But yes, there are people who are irrationally angry at Unity there are people who suspected of being something other than it is either something to bolster our channel here when in fact it costs our channel that's why it a bit since we don't monetize any of the things that we have put out in the context of unity. Anyway, we could go into why it's costly, but now this is you like it or hate it. It's it's motivated by exactly what we said it has been motivated by which is a sense of the nation is in danger, and that we need a solution and that this is an emergency plan. So anyway, yes, we do know that it was reported. And the fact is, that a system in which your enemies can report whatever you're doing, and that gives Twitter whatever platform license to do whatever it wants, because it's gonna say, well, well, you were reported for spamming or whatever it was. That is a system in which the platform is given complete discretion to do what it wants. And you know, it can hide behind the idea of reports by people who were motivated by confusion or my level. answer whatever.

Heather 1:10:02
For more Have you read Ron owns his myth of American meritocracy? Now as the answer to that part of the question, I know, I doubt you have either Nope. It argues that Jewish whites are 450% over represented as Ivy League students compared to their percentage of high ability students in the general population. Do you have thoughts?

Bret 1:10:22
Well, that? I don't think it argues it sounds like it claims.

Heather 1:10:26
Yeah. It puts forth a number that is or is not true.

Bret 1:10:30
Yeah. And, you know, I,

Heather 1:10:33
so the question is like, if if that is true, yeah. Then what do we make of it? But we have to know if that is true. But, you know, plenty of people have have said, you know, what, East Asians and Jewish people are overrepresented compared to other demographics at, in, for instance, the Ivy League. And I mean, I think your argument here is going to be just the same as when you're talking about any of these race or ethnicity and intelligence or capability or success. Questions. It's that it doesn't have to live in the hardware layer. And in fact, you don't expect it to

Bret 1:11:11
Yeah, I think it lives at the Seder table. And I think that, you know, yeah, the fact is, I, I know more Ashkenazi Jews than I do Sephardic Jews, but I will say, Ashkenazi tables, it is very frequent for people to have good natured, but pointed arguments with each other about stuff that matters. And the fact is, I think it creates a culture of holding each other's feet to the fire, it creates a culture of, you know, getting your ducks in a row before you make an argument and figuring out which arguments are secure and which ones are going to give way underneath you. And that that has impact. And, frankly, I think it's valuable, I think it has a lot to do with having lived to the diaspora, which is a very vulnerable position to live in. And that, you know, there's clearly something going on with success in certain realms by Ashkenazi Jews. And I think it's worth learning from.

Heather 1:12:10
Yeah, and you know, the Seder table, I mean, I think, actually, the Seder table as a model that can be moved into other realms of life would be a very powerful thing to explore. And as you were talking, I thought, you know, of course, I didn't grow up with a sitter table, my own house, but I got to, I got to visit many, among family, friends and friends. And I think that you and I, both your together sort of CO created a kind of Seder table phenomenon in our classrooms that that is actually what we did. And it's the opposite of the now common use of the term safe space, we created spaces where we actually had respect and trust for one another, our students and us. And they knew that when we disagreed with them, or criticize them, that we were not making a personal accusation about them, or claiming that they were not worthy, but perhaps their ideas weren't. And we were willing to get into it with them. And this, this created an actual, it's like a safer space, it's, you know, it's, it's it is it is an actual safe space, that creates anti fragility rather than for other than weak links,

Bret 1:13:20
it is a socially safe space created amongst people who are honorable enough to handle it, and it creates the right incentive, you know, because if we, you know, if we challenge the students argument, and you know, that's weak, because if that were true, it would predict these things, which we don't see. And then the student thinks about it, and they say, actually, I think it's true because X, Y, or Z, and then you say, Yep, you got it. Right. That's that's compelling. Then the point is, it reinforces this sort of careful thinking and extrapolation behavior. That is the stuff of nuanced thought.

Heather 1:13:57
Yeah. Three more hybrid, your perspective has been very insightful and influential on my thinking. I'm curious, if you think that you end 2020 could lead the way to game be?

Bret 1:14:08
Hmm, good question. I have been talking to people in many different realms about the idea that these things are all manifestations of the same phenomenon in different realms. So I don't see it as just unity. And game B, I see unity as the it's a political but in a political realm. It is a manifestation of the same kind of thinking that game B is at a complex systems and society level, which is the same thing as it W is in discussion space. as open source movement is in the technological space as blockchain and crypto is potentially to the financial space. All of these things are attempts to solve a systems level problem with the higher quality answer. That is stable and competitively viable. And anyway, my hope is that all of these different entities are going to recognize the shared objective at a system that works with minimal architecture, and that they will join forces, because that's a much more powerful response to the problems that we find ourselves. With, then each of us trying to solve our problem individually, and thinking that those other projects have nothing to do with it.

Heather 1:15:30
I realized I skipped one, and it's a comment. So I'll go back to it. And then we'll do the last to wait until the pro riding lady realizes that many words in English that refer to government institutions come from the normal oppression of the English. If you're interested, there's a very good language focus on this.

Bret 1:15:45
I admit I don't know what words we're talking

Heather 1:15:47
about I can either of you offer your insights on styles of instruction between institutions, method shared an academic learning or medical training versus corporate or military style training, any observations would be appreciated. God, there's just there's so much to say about education. And you know, I don't we know less about, for instance, exactly what happens within say, military, or even even at medical schools. One important distinction being that when there is an understood goal, you know, in something that can be called a trade school or professional school, where you're there to become a doctor or become a coder or whatever. There is less room in the curriculum for exploration and for just kind of sitting around and exchanging ideas, and you don't know what the goal is. And that's what liberal arts is supposed to do is supposed to provide room for exploration such that you can not only be your best self set, such that you can go out into the world and make a difference and, and make a living, but also become your best self. So those that's one distinction that I would make that is an important one.

Bret 1:17:00
I would argue that the hidden secret to improving education and everything is understanding the motivational structures underneath. And that what we saw with people educated in the standard way we then came to us is that they very often had perverse incentives built into their mode. In other words, if you were very good student, and being a good student got a lot of accolades from the people at the front of the room, maybe you got very focused on what the people at the front of the room thought, rather than what was actually true, which meant that you couldn't innovate beyond what the person at the front of the room knew, because they would think it was wrong. And you would have to have the courage of your convictions, which you hadn't learned the, the taste for. So in all of these things, you want the person to want to engage in the exercise that makes them smarter or wiser, and you want success to line up exactly with the thing that they should accomplish when they get out of the exercise and into the real thing. And so, you know, ultimately, if we survive, what will education look like? It's going to look like games, puzzles, exercises, role playing all sorts of fun stuff, sitting around campfires together, sitting around campfires, yes, in fact, exploring remote places. Hopefully, eventually, if we do our job, right, you stop knowing when you're working, and when you're not, when you're learning. And when you're not that these things bleed into each other so seamlessly, that you basically know that there's stuff that you feel rewarded for doing. And either it's enhancing your toolkit or it's wielding your toolkit, or it's doing both, but that the process of being human becomes intuitive, and highly productive.

Heather 1:18:55
Last one is a comment. That's a good one to end on. Today is wonderful. I watched the campfire show, I have some ice cold beer. And now I have two hours of two happy cats. And two beautiful intelligent podcast hosts. I really love the insights you both give and thanks for all that you do. Thank you,

Bret 1:19:12
man. What a great note to end on. Yeah, I just feel so good. I bet the cats feel good about

Heather 1:19:17
it, too. Oh, no doubt they're off looking for steak. I

Bret 1:19:20
expect presumably. Yes. Yeah. All right. Well, thank

Heather 1:19:23
you for that.

Bret 1:19:23
Yeah. Thank you. Thank you so much.

Heather 1:19:26
We will not be back on Tuesday, we will be back in a week. With another live stream there will be at least one Dark Horse podcast where there will be one Dark Horse podcast being released between now and then. And I think at least one campfire as well. Maybe more than that from from unity.

Bret 1:19:42
Yeah, stay tuned. Assuming our unity account really is back up. If you're not signed up for it, please sign up on Twitter. Give us your email address in case somebody else comes after us and cancels our account. Do that at articles of unity.org Sign up for you have a Patreon thing upcoming.

Heather 1:20:03
Oh, yes, we have we have the private q&a for for Darkhorse members tomorrow at 11am. So if you sign up on my Patreon at the $5 or more level before tomorrow at 11 you'll be able to go and see the link for that. And we'll do a two hour q&a the questions we've already received. In the beginning of the month, you will be doing your big ticket Patreon conversations.

Bret 1:20:31
I cannot believe this month

Heather 1:20:36
and so it goes Yeah, all right. So it goes

Bret 1:20:38
good. Well, anyway, it's been great folks, and we'll see you next time. Get outside Yes, get outside Well, the sun sun still shines. Alright, be well

This transcript was generated by https://otter.ai