Bret 0:11
Hey folks, welcome back to the Dark Horse podcast live stream our 33rd Q and A I'm here with Dr. Heather hein. I understand there has been some consternation in the chat about the absence of my bandana face mask. Let me explain. I went for a ride this morning to see what was happening in the undeclared autonomous zone in downtown Portland this morning. And when I came back, my mask was predictably soaked with sweat. So I took it off and I forgot to put one back on so that's what happened. Awesome. Yeah. All right. It's it's, it's an answer to an implied question.

Heather 0:52
Yes, it is. It is. Okay, so we're gonna start, as has become our habit with a couple of questions from Episode 32 that we didn't get to, that I thought warranted us returning to, and then we'll launch into the top questions from last hour, the top questions in terms of of monetary value. One, is there no merit to partially defunding the police and reallocating those funds to other organizations that would handle some of the misplaced responsibilities that police currently handle?

Bret 1:22
None. Let me explain. Now there's none. If this were an honest argument, then the point is,

Heather 1:30
okay, go for it. But I would like I think that this is asked as if, you know, what would the honest argument sound like, and the honest argument does have merit?

Bret 1:39
Oh, the honest argument has merit. And you know, it's not like we haven't decried the militarization of police. And I know that for a couple of decades, I've been talking about the hazard of private prisons and the perverse incentive that it creates all these things, but

Heather 1:56
but specifically, you know, the reallocation of funds for other organizations to do things that police have come to do, right. And the I mean, this is something that you've talked about before, actually, you know, why? Why are police the first line of defense when people are having mental health crises on the streets? Right, is that is that really the right job for police? Right? So not? So absolutely, there is room to imagine reconfiguring how resources are sped and who would be the best people to deal with various jobs

Bret 2:27
problem says, I don't want to help these people construct their mot. This is a Martin Bailey. And here's the problem. There is no logical reason to connect these two things. Okay. There may be too much in police budgets. I don't know if there is or there isn't, I am certain that it is not optimally allocated. I do not know if anybody can spell out what the optimal allocation would be. However, should there be more dedicated to social programs that make the police less necessary? Of course, should there be less than the police budgets, certainly, following the rendering of police as unnecessary, I look forward to seeing a reduction in police forces by virtue of the fact that we're spending too much on them. But to link these two things, as if taking the funds from the police is necessary in order to make those programs work is a garbage argument, demonstrate that we are spending too much demonstrate that we are spending it in the wrong way. And then there's a proper response, demonstrate that there's a need for social programs, then there's an obvious response. But to link these two things, is the motto of a motte and Bailey, and I'm not interested in playing that game.

Heather 3:38
Again, question from last time with regard to the Navy vet whom we spoke about, on either that one or the previous episode with regard to this guy haven't gone to the protests and haven't been beaten on camera by Homeland Security Officers. The person says so civil disobedience is not okay. Citizens wouldn't have been very effective of activists listened to police and vacated lunch counters.

Bret 4:03
Yep, so civil disobedience is obviously okay and not okay. Right. Are you allowed to engage in civil disobedience? You know, if you get a parking ticket, and you'd think it was legitimate, are you allowed to block a freeway? Presumably not. So the point is, this is actually a judgment call. And I don't actually know what the explanation is for that vet and what he did, and it's possible that the idea was to precipitate a reaction that would be Tella jack, in which case, probably not legit. On the other hand, there are certainly instances in which such a thing can be done for the right reason and maybe has to be done for the right reason. So it's a judgment call. It is not inherently okay that it is civil disobedience. Civil Disobedience is a category that can be okay and can be necessary, but in this case, it looked like it's feeding a false narrative. Which is that? The feds don't need to be here that they are engaged in a fascist crackdown, because Trump, and you know, that's sort of the extent of the argument. And for people living in Portland, facing the prospect of having police failing to enforce the laws that keep us safe. It's not so simple. It just isn't.

Heather 5:23
Yeah, my history may fail me here, but sit ins and lunch counters Munchkin, our students, and as such, from the 60s, were, in part a response to selectively racially biased policing, for sure. And so there was civil disobedience against police. But I do not believe and this is where I'm just I'm not sure. And I'm sure we'll hear about it if I'm wrong, that there was a concomitant move, and if so, it certainly wasn't a majority move to abolish all of the police. So with the abolish the police move that is happening right now, if you add that to civil disobedience, you have now justified any single thing that involves resisting anything police might do, which obviously immediately would stand archy. Yeah,

Bret 6:11
it immediately gets to anarchy. And, you know, obviously, at lunch counters, black people had a right to eat at those lunch counters to the extent that they were barred, sitting down at those lunch counters was a very natural response. Likewise, Rosa Parks refusing to give up her seat, why should she give up her seat? So the point is, those were actually absolutely natural outgrowth of the oppression in question, whereas flaunting the law of flouting the law of the state of Oregon, the City of Portland, is a different matter and tied up in mountains.

Heather 6:47
To play devil's advocate for a moment, it is very easy retrospectively, to say, obviously, Rosa Parks was was right and having segregated drinking fountains and lunch counters was wrong. And we can see that was such clarity, and we would all have been on the right side of history. And of course, most people would not have been on the right side of history, because we know that from well, history. So it's not that there will be 100% clarity with regard to when civil disobedience is appropriate and when it's not. But when it is being blanketly applied to every single thing that any kind of policing force might do. You know, there's something else afoot. Next question, totally different. With regard to longevity in science fiction. In Highlands with useless children, ageless humans are created through artificial selection. In p Anderson's the boat of a million years. HLS humans are created through natural selection is either possible.

Bret 7:50
No, unless you're willing to extend the definition. In other words, which agelessness? Human, okay, no, I mean, look, if you're willing to buy something like the upload of a human consciousness to an artificial structure, then there's no bar to indefinite longevity.

Heather 8:08
It's not possible yet, but it might be. It's not biometrically possible. But the fact

Bret 8:12
is, there is no reason to think Well, some people would disagree with this, I think they're all missing the point. But there's no reason to think there's anything calculated in a mind that could not be produced in a computing environment. Now, we are not remotely close to this. And frankly, we haven't even really understood how the mind works well enough to even spell out what the job is.

Heather 8:33
But we've still got some crazy blueprint version of an understanding. Yeah, and

Bret 8:37
unless, unless you are one of one of these Pan psychist, people who believe that the particles themselves have something to do with consciousness. And the point is, their calculations of some kind. And to the extent that they were calculations of some kind, they can be in an environment where you have indefinitely large amounts of energy and potentially indefinitely large amounts of or numbers of transistors that can be brought into play, you can simulate anything right up through the analog. So yeah, you could upload maybe, but short of uploading, can you take this critter and make it indefinitely, long lived? Only if you recognize the absurdity of the question, how would you do it? You would recognize that lineage is the real thing, right? lineages are indefinitely long lived, the individual is finite, cannot be extended should not be extended, I mean, extended a bit, sure, but indefinitely long lived individuals would be a catastrophe. And finally, if you did it for the body, and you don't do it for the mind, it's a nightmare scenario. So can we stop dreaming about this garbage and enjoy the fact that life is delightful and part of what makes it delightful is that it's not infinite?

Heather 9:56
Good. First question from last hour to the protests and riots have a stated end goal. I guess it's just abolish the USA. You say, quote, the police should enforce the law. And I agree but how exactly what tactics would you use arrest everyone, every night tear gas disperse money to go home?

Bret 10:16
It's a great question. And in fact, it's one that I want to ask some of the people who are protests, I want to ask that to the people who are most most capable of answering it, and chaos. But let's say this, the nature of a riot is that there is a failure of the ability to enforce the law based on the immediacy, the suddenness, the fact of the force being overwhelmed, right? The same thing that creates looting is that you have a force built for normal circumstances, when something abnormal of sufficient magnitude arises, the force is not adequate to do it. Two months into a reliable riot. That's not where you are, whatever resources need to be brought to bear on two blocks of Portland. Is it possible to bring a force large enough to deal with law breakers in two blocks of Portland? Of course it is. So the fact that we're not doing it is not because it's impossible to figure out what those tactics might be. It's that there's no will to do it, and the no will to do it at the local level forces the feds to defend their buildings, which is then being portrayed as a fascist incursion, etc. And so you know, look, it's theater, it's theater, with the, you know, weapons with weapons, and so weaponized, later, let's just not pretend that it's something else. This was a failure of the local, which is leaving the federal as the last line of defense. And it shouldn't surprise anybody that there's some level of federal enforcement to protect these buildings. That's where we are.

Heather 11:49
Yeah. And just to speak briefly to the first question in this question to the protests or riots have a stated end goal. I haven't heard it. You know, we've seen things like abolish USA, and you know, and defund the police, which in some people's minds means and the police. But I will relay an anecdote that Nancy Rahman, who lived here in Portland for 15 years and just moved away last year, but is back at the moment reporting for reason, in one of her one of her missives that is now published at reason about what is going on here on the ground in Portland, she reports just a conversation with a young slight girl really like a young woman who probably weighs less than 100 pounds, who's sort of on the front lines at the, at the Federal Building, as they as the protesters are trying to get in this is, you know, well after midnight. And, Nancy, here's her asks, and what plaintively what happens if we get in? And no one answers, right. And this, I think, is is telling that if there is a stated end goal, it's not shared by even all the people who are participating. And by which I don't mean they don't all agree, but most of them don't even know it. So

Bret 13:04
I would say the movement has an end goal, and it is the capture and wielding of power over resources. That is where it will catch up. For sure. Right? The local phenomenon does not the goal is happening. The goal is the ability to portray what is taking place as a fascist incursion into Portland, that the New York Times will dutifully report as such, and this is that set we've gotten.

Heather 13:33
Yeah. Next question. If it is permissible to litigate past crimes and extract repair from other groups descendants, might the fact that Europeans genome is 2% Neanderthal given them a reparations claim against African Homo sapiens and their Neanderthal hominid?

Bret 13:52
Yes. Well,

Heather 13:54
I read that this is obviously somewhat tongue in cheek I hope, I assume. But it does, it does point to one of the deep and abiding problems with asking for a correction of historical wrongs, which is that every single population on the planet has done wrong and been wronged. That's just that's just part of part of what is true. I had a friend in Olympia, you know, very liberal, very progressive woman who used to say I don't understand why we are expected to call the indigenous Native Americans First Peoples they weren't the first they were placed earlier peoples who probably also weren't the first they are of the lineage that was first but pretending that they were again noble savages, who just lived on the land in this blissful utopia. No, that's that's not what happened. So yeah, there was there. There have been hominid against hominid interactions since there have been hominids Of course there have

Bret 14:55
Yep. Now I must say this is this feels personal to me because I strongly suspect that I have more One Neanderthal than average.

Heather 15:02
But yeah, because of the brow ridge as I wind, you know, it is what it is, but I just can't read why I've never heard this before. I

Bret 15:10
don't know, I just it resonates. So in any case, yeah, no, obviously I mean, your your point is well made using the Neanderthals. And the fact is, look, let's just do this the right way. You know, the arc of the moral universe is long and it bends towards justice. That's obviously the right goal. It remains the right goal. We've named it we have not gotten all the way to the arc of the end of the arc of the moral universe. But the idea that we are now losing the plot of that, and going into a new form of injustice is just insane.

Heather 15:41
Yep. Really, really a tragedy. Have you seen Ryan Long's video when works on racists actually agree on everything? To me, this is the incisive comedic take we've needed. Yeah, it's it's fabulous. Maybe we should actually link that in the description. Yeah, we we haven't shown it because we don't really show all videos, but it's, what, two or three minutes?

Bret 16:00
It's well, we're a few times it's beautiful. It's very well done.

Heather 16:05
Next question, what responses are probable or likely if Trump wins in November? How do the streets of America look in the following weeks? That's from Ilan Tusk?

Bret 16:17
Yeah, the I shudder to think, you know, that said again, I, the danger of Biden being elected with the partnership that he has clearly formed with what even is the right to term is that the movement for Black Lives is that what's going on. But in any case, the either case is so unacceptable, that really, unity 2020 that's the point. Either case is absolutely unex acceptable, and the confluence of the the aggrieved side, and the way it will understand what has taken place means that the parties have just set us up for a national catastrophe. We have to escape their hegemony for this reason they have set us up.

Heather 17:11
Yeah, it's it will send us closer to an actual race war. And if either one wins, honestly, there may be claims that there was election tampering. And if there is any evidence at all of election tampering that sends us, you know, one step, a big step closer to the end of democracy,

Bret 17:31
you know, and Trump has been setting us up for that interpretation. He has been tweeting about the legitimacy of mail in ballots and all, and so it won't take much. Yeah, the interpretation will be that this is a stolen election, almost no matter what happens. Unless, of course, you vote unity. 2020. Right. What are the chances unity 2020 stole the election? I mean, that's impossible,

Heather 17:55
stole it from the rightful heirs, two party system Co Op. Wonderful. Yeah. Do you have advice for aspiring fiction writers outside of the institution, literature will be crucial for exploring the interest psychic and social complexities of this era. Secondly, will you read my letter against Abraham candies, anti racism in schools? Oh, that's interesting. I'm actually I have set myself the homework of reading the brown candy. So I'm not going to read anyone else's interpretation of it until I do but I would be interested in seeing, seeing such a letter. You know, advice for aspiring fiction writers, we've spoken earlier to the capture of literature and other art forms by this movement. And it's really it's really a shame publishing, has been captured books get cancelled by their publishers before they even go to press in some cases. Because the woke scolds say that they're not, you know, they were written by the wrong person with the wrong demographics or the wrong conclusion or something. So, one, one good thing at the moment is that it's possible to self publish. But I do think just like, you know, it feels like an ages ago, but three years ago, we were saying, well, University of Chicago with Chicago principles should be rising. And in you know, in terms of all of these students and parents of students, parents would be college students who are looking for a school that is actually resistant to this scourge that is anti intellectual and anti reality. And AI, while University of Chicago seems to be falling into line along with the rest of institutions, which I can't quite fully understand. I would say that there are certainly many, many people out here who are looking for good fiction that is not that is not woke. So there has to be an audience figuring out how to get the books that are excellent and not woke into the hands of people who are looking for such books is trickier. If the police are defunded next question, then how will they afford the 20 to $30,000 that Robyn D'Angelo charges to be a keynote speaker, and thereby let them know how racist they are. Just saying, thanks for the dark horse was dumb.

Bret 20:14
Yep. Yeah.

Heather 20:17
As a web dev and college student with zero biology background, where should I go to get an introduction to evolutionary biology? Which book should I read first a podcast or else Wish you both the best Keep up the great work?

Bret 20:28
Um, so what I would say is for years, we have recommended Dawkins Selfish Gene as the starting point.

Heather 20:38
It's what we often started within our own programs. Yeah, it was the first book we assigned, had them read them read it before they showed up for the first day class.

Bret 20:45
And if you get a the most recent edition, it comes with extensive endnotes where Dawkins himself has tracked so the book was written in 76, or as published in 76. And he tracks where he was right where he was wrong, what we now know that kind of thing. So it's very well done, I will say there is a missing, there are a couple of missing elements. And maybe most important, is the fact that in 76, there was almost nothing to say about molecular epigenetics, and it is playing such an important role in our understanding of mechanistic biology, that its absence from the book does result in it being dated. But in any case, it is an excellent starting place. That's what you've asked for. It's an excellent starting place. It deals with the introductory game theory, it deals with the introductory genetics, it deals with all sorts of things that are well worth understanding. So I would say start there.

Heather 21:44
Yep. I guess, on sort of the other side of evolutionary biology probably that's exactly what you're looking for. And it's, it's exactly where we started. But if you're looking for the macro, evolutionary stuff, that sort of history of species and species level evolution, another Dawkins book, actually is even less dated. And a wonderful read and does give you some of the other theoretical things without going into game theory and micro microevolution population level stuff, which is an ancestors tale, in which he takes it basically takes a tour back through his through humans back through history to the origins of life on Earth, by looking at what each of our most recent common ancestors, or some extent relative of them might look like now and and takes from that. Stories that he can tell about genetics, about development, etc. It's really quite good. Yeah, ancestors tale.

Bret 22:43
It's brilliant. If you think that the tree of life and all of the branchings that took place, on the way to being modern humans, he goes back to each of the nodes. Yep. Yeah. And actually, as long as we're on this topic, if adaptation rather than evolution in the larger sense of what you're after, if adaptation is what you're after, then climbing Mount improbable, is quite beautiful. It's all about? Well, I mean, look, yeah, if you're looking, you know, if you're looking for what a modern view of evolutionary theory looks like, Dawkins is a great starting place. Now the question you should be asking is, why have we made so little progress from what Dawkins understood and it's a question I put to Dawkins and got what I consider to be an absurd answer, which is that basically we got it all right, which can't possibly be true, given what we still don't understand.

Heather 23:33
Now, the books that we will have published next year, is not meant to be a primer on evolution. Exactly. But it does provide a lot of the tools that we are talking about as well.

Bret 23:45
Yep. All right.

Heather 23:50
Hi, Breton. Heather. I really enjoy listening to discussions I live in Portland and I have identified 31 law is currently going on enforced on for related to dereliction of duty. I'd like to start a suit and need a good lawyer. Do you know any second part of the question because there's two here Hardesty said $7 million plus was spent on police. ot I'm not sure what overtime police overtime. They could have ended the riots weeks ago. anyone living in Portland can submit a fraud or waste claim against the city and state on the Secretary of State website. That's interesting.

Bret 24:22
So do we know a good lawyer The problem is good lawyer is an oxymoron a skilled lawyer now there we know a few

Heather 24:32
we don't know any in Portland that we know. They're not like Portland, unfortunately. Now. We don't know any lawyers in Oregon. Yeah, you

Bret 24:37
don't want a good lawyer because it holds them back. You want a shark? That's what you want.

Heather 24:41
You're not helpful.

Bret 24:42
I'm not helping at all. Was I trying to be help? I think I was no, but I was not succeeding. No, I

Heather 24:49
think you were trying not to be helpful and you were succeeding.

Bret 24:53
Well, I feel better.

Heather 24:55
That's important Portland timeline, Taiwan. Important Portland timeline agenda. The riots shifted focus specifically to the courthouse or on July 4, after the feds began clearing demonstrators blocks away from the federal property. Okay, I didn't I did not remember that. Is it possible that the hatred of the cisgendered and nuclear family is because transexuals feel excluded from natural reproduction, family formation? For the record, I think the move is being disingenuous and their trans support. Yeah, I think I think just like with the protest slash Riot movement that we see that looks like a majority of people are getting behind right now. The trans, the trans movement appears to be something that we all need to get behind, because it's the newest civil rights thing. But in fact, you know, in fact, the question uses the word transsexual. Most of the people who are the trans rights activists, the tra is the trans rights activists are not the transsexuals of the 50 6070s 80s these are activists who are cosplaying at being something that they are not. And that is not to suggest that there aren't real trans people with real gender dysphoria. And, you know, a disconnect somehow for some developmental reason, between what their chromosomal and anatomical and brain and behavioral sex and gender say they are, there's there's a disjunction between those manifestations of sex and it's excruciating and, and we know some people for who experienced this and it's awful. That's not most of what's going on, though. And so I would say I actually object in the same way that you often object when I want to try to put, you know, a good try to explain something to the best of my ability with a good spin like, you know what I I'm actually so out of patience with these people on this one that I'm not I'm not even going to provide them ammunition to come back, even though even though I don't I don't buy their arguments at all. And in fact, I think the next question is, is related here. So you may want to add something, but the next question is, and it comes with a smiley face. emoticon. If Congress was 50%, sis men and 50%, male to female trans women. What do you agree that it had a good gender split? Yes, this is this is exactly the problem. Yeah, right there.

Bret 27:35
Yeah, no, it's the problem is there is an an honest, compassionate argument for protection of trans people. However, it creates a loophole for certain folks who want to use this designation as a shield for doing all kinds of harm. And so somehow, you have to do these two things, you have to develop the protection for people who need the protection without creating the loophole for people who would exploit.

Heather 28:04
That's right. Well, thank you, Brett. And Heather, y'all stay safe. We will. Thank you. progressives paradox. If a disabled trans person of color states I think a person's argument should be judged on its own merit rather than the level of perceived victimhood of the person saying it what happens

Bret 28:22
as a matter anti matter? Yeah. Yeah, it's it's Yeah, it's troubling. But I mean, we have exactly this phenomenon with out quite so many parameters, right? We there, you know, there's no shortage of courageous, highly cogent black voices pointing out how crazy this movement is. Right? There's there's all sorts of evidence that this is not simply some conclusion that we've all arrived at, because because it's clear that basically everybody who's thinking carefully knows that it isn't what's being portrayed. So yeah, anyway, well stated.

Heather 29:04
been watching this for the past few weeks, and I've never been so delightfully terrified. Thank you for doing these if

Bret 29:09
we aim to delightfully terrifying. Yeah.

Heather 29:14
What probability would you assign the hypothesis that the woke movement slash Ponzi scheme is in part, the result of another country conducting social media Inception on America's young progressive population?

Bret 29:25
Well, there's a question about cause and amplification. I don't know what I would say about the chances that it is fundamentally initiated as an experiment from outside the country. But I would say the chances that none of our enemies are amplifying this online is pretty small, because obviously the hazard that it poses to the to the mighty us is so great, that if we can get us to self sabotage, if somehow they can get us to self sabotage, they will do it. So yes, I am You know, is it enough to have altered things substantially? Who knows? It's a question that could be studied using something like logic and science were it not for the fact that those are apparently white supremacist and tools of the patriarchy and tools in the Patriot? Yes. Well said

Heather 30:15
and sis people. This I'm not sure what it's apropos I don't remember if one of us said something to this effect, there are no accidental discharges, there were only negligent discharges. Full stop.

Bret 30:31
Yeah, down that must be referring to the rally in Louisville, and the fact that somebody apparently discharged a weapon. So anyway, I think this is a, a, a literally false, metaphorically, true extension of all firearms are loaded. You know, there are no accidental discharges. Because you loaded the weapon, something like that. Yeah.

Heather 31:01
And now for something completely different. You spoke of how dreams could be a way of your subconscious offering you insights. Can you speak further the evolutionary reasons for dreams? And do you suppose lucid dreaming could be a further enhancement of this process?

Bret 31:13
Sweet question. Yeah. All right, I will say, the primary value of dreams. So first of all, I should say the more you dig into this, the more you discover that there are lots of different kinds of dreams, and that one person's dreams don't look like another. And so there is a huge landscape to be explored here. And one thing I have been saying for forever is that we should figure out what hunter gatherers dream about before there are no more hunter gatherers, because it would be wonderful to know what the base state was. But what we can say is that an awful large percentage of dreams appear to be scenario building. That is to say, while your brain is not occupied by processing, active incoming data, it takes probabilistic it takes a probabilistic look at things that you fear things, opportunities you might avail yourself of, and it runs you through scenarios so that when you get to these things, it's not your first time through, right doesn't have to be fully rendered, it just has to be good enough, and you have to suspend your disbelief enough that when the scenario hits, you can sort of try it out. And I will say I've learned one thing about scenarios from my own experiments with lucid dreaming, which is, if I'm lucid dreaming, difficult state to get to, but if I can get there, and then I say, Well, this is my brain writing this story, I should be able to predict what's going to happen next. It never works. It literally has never once worked, right? That tells you something,

Heather 32:42
it tells you you're saying that the prediction has been wrong every time every single

Bret 32:45
time, as if to have predicted it is to invalidate that storyline, like the whole point of scenario building, would be to run you through things that you don't see coming. So this, right, and so my point would be whatever part of your brain makes the movies, the conscious part of your brain is not allowed in because the thing wouldn't work, it wouldn't be valuable to you if it was so

Heather 33:10
your dreams are not a safe space.

Bret 33:12
My dreams are very dangerous, I have to say,

Heather 33:16
talking about your dreams in particular. But I think that the the hypothesis here is that dreams are explicitly not a safe space. They are where your consciousness goes to actually make you safer in your waking life. But that means that they're going to put you in in apparent danger in your sleep space.

Bret 33:32
Yeah, there's no point in running you through scenarios in which things are all cool, and nothing's gonna go wrong. So my dreams are really about stuff going wrong all the time.

Heather 33:42
But it explains why you sleep the way. Yes,

Bret 33:44
that's a little bit chaotic. But okay, as to your final question about lucid dreams. lucid dreams, I believe, are an occasional phenomenon, which may be adaptive, that is to say the discovery that you are in a dream, which usually wakes you up. So learning to stay asleep through that is not easy, but nonetheless, it happens at some low rate, under normal circumstances for people who have not trained themselves, but training yourself to stay asleep, even when you become lucid, which is exhausting. But it's fascinating, what you will discover you do and don't have control over. That is a hack, right? You're not supposed to have conscious access to your dreams, you can gain it, you will lose stuff, you will gain stuff. So I would say to the extent that humans hack their own cognition, this is a totally valid hack, and I'm sure that it has important positive evolutionary outgrowth. But probably mostly it is not. The reason that we don't have lucid dreams is that in general, that does not bring you the highest value.

Heather 34:54
Let's just do a couple more here and then we'll switch to the next live stream questions. I'm interested to know if the two of you have an opinion on submitting data to 23andme. With an adopted father and maternal grandmother, it's very tempting. I'm not into conspiracy theories, but I'm also aware that they'd have my DNA forever. We haven't done it for exactly this reason, concerns about privacy. And it looks like you have to sign away your rights to your own DNA, in order to to get results. Now, you could do it anonymously. Which means that your data won't plug in and be able to help other people understand their own genealogies if you slot into a particular place, etc. But it would protect you in terms of linking anything that is learned to your personal identity. That seems like the only way that I know we haven't even done that. It might protect you. Yeah, exactly. It might protect you, if

Bret 35:54
somebody was really interested, they could figure out who you were using a composite of who you're related to, and other available information, right. So I would say none of this is safe. And you know, there's one way in which, you know, a large part of 23andme may, in fact, be kind of like a Facebook gamble, where the point is, actually, you're the product, your information is the valuable commodity, and that you get a free service for it. So this would be a nominal charge to collect your DNA. And I think your concerns are are warranted, they're

Heather 36:27
they're warranted and yet having an adopted father and maternal grandmother, of course, you'd be curious. My brother's adopted, I think that I think that it's even more intriguing. If you have if it's not just I wonder if the family stories are true, or can I add more detail to the family stories, but I actually don't have family stories? And I'd really like some I'd really like to have some sense. And of course, it can also aid in, in disease, prediction. Yep. So it's, it's tricky. And I think we just we need, we need better regulation of this particular industry. Before you were I are going to feel safe doing it. Yeah.

Bret 37:09
I agree.

Heather 37:13
I want the freedom to fight against Brett's ideas in an honest forum. Thank you both for your dedication to the Republic. And next question, same person. Also, thank you for bringing the concept of game theory and tragedy of the commons and common conversation.

Bret 37:27
So this person find my stuff particularly objectionable is

Heather 37:31
that I don't know. This is someone who's asked questions before. I think, you know, the idea is I don't think particularly my guesses, but

Bret 37:42
hard to imagine that they're here asking questions in the Super Chat if they find me particularly terrible, but honest forum, honest form. All right. Well, I'm all for honest forums. Yeah. For I think for

Heather 37:55
Yeah, not parameter. Let's halls different different. Yeah. Last question here, and then we'll switch to the next. This one is a two part totally different questions. Would you consider having YouTube lectures on game theory? And do you have any thoughts on the EU? As a European myself, I'm worried that this project is fundamentally flawed and undemocratic.

Bret 38:17
Yeah, so the first question why I've now forgotten

Heather 38:22
YouTube lectures on Game Theory, well,

Bret 38:24
there definitely is a need for some sort of lectures on Game Theory. I do think

Unknown 38:30
you can get the right people. You can teach yourself game

Bret 38:33
theory.

Heather 38:33
Well, but we, we get this question a lot. And the fact is, there aren't good, there is no good text to point people to there are a couple of papers here and there. And it is far easier to do it in real time with people who already have facility with the tools and can who can sort of show you when you've when you've made an error. And you're thinking Yep, I feel like I'm surprised if there is not and therefore I wonder if there in fact, is not a good YouTube series on Game Theory already. I don't know of one. I'd be curious to hear about it. If if people think that there are

Bret 39:06
David surak Oh, yeah, I was working on one. And I saw very good stuff from him initially. So I don't know what we're actually checking on that project and see, but you know, you kind of need animations. Yeah. To make these things clear. And so anyway, I'm very hopeful that he's produced exactly the thing you're looking for.

Heather 39:25
Okay, let's say Ric Yeah. And then the EU.

Bret 39:30
Oh, the EU, right. Well, I'm in favor of the EU, but I'd like to see it move offshore canal. Well, it all depends on the structure. You put water in my water. I did put water in your water. It's a little practical joke. I was playing on you. Yeah, let's put it this way. I'm not I'm not an expert on the structure. There's obviously an advantage to Federation there's a hazard to Federation the Brits. Now involved in both the hazard of Federation and the Hatter hazard of trying to extract themselves from it. So I don't know enough about it to say but I would say my guess is was not done very well because it was naive about things like game theory. But was some sort of Federation necessary? Is it a proper hedge against another world war started in Europe? Maybe. So anyway, mixed bag would be the answer.

Heather 40:34
Okay, questions from this live stream. The latest Glenn show with john McWhorter was stellar. JOHN mentioned that we need a word for the identitarian left. I've seen unlike inquisitors, other ideas. Yeah, we've called it the woke scolds the woke r&b

Bret 40:54
plague of locusts. Oh, how about this one? The Civil wrongs movement?

Heather 41:07
That's good. Yeah. Yeah. It's it's the it's the movement level name rather than the the civil wrongs activists.

Bret 41:15
Yeah. I have a feeling they won't like,

Heather 41:20
like, inquisitors or plague of wolgast or woke skulls, either.

Bret 41:23
There's a lot to work with there.

Heather 41:25
I mean, it's Yeah, they and I was going to mock them a little bit. And I think it's not not nice and maybe not accurate. You know, they don't like social justice warriors, because it's been used as a as a epithet. But it seems to me that that is what they are trying to do that that is actually an an honest and just just thinking of the words description of what they claimed to be doing. Now, those of us who are speaking against it say, it's not it's not justice, guys. That's civil wrongs, not civil rights. But that does actually seem to describe what they are. But that's now seen as an epithet. And so calling them that is seen as aggressive.

Bret 42:08
I think it's totally illegitimate that it's seen as aggressive because it's basically them viewed from their own lens. They are warriors on behalf of social justice. It's like calling an Tifa and Tifa, even

Heather 42:18
though I don't think they're really fighting back the anti racists Yeah.

Bret 42:21
So at some level, if you're accepting somebody else's viewpoint to name their movement, you're doing them a favor, and to be chastised for it, because you're on the other side is preposterous. So

Heather 42:35
are the DNA strands and are the DNA strands and a tit for tat relationship? Are

Bret 42:44
DNA. So are we talking about chromatids?

Heather 42:47
Now, like the the five prime and three prime strands? Oh, right. I think I think it continues, would you agree that all living things are engineered by tit for tat, except for the number of variables, Eg a fir tree responds to less outside stimuli than an oak? This echo who's really, really smart, but also often tries to fit more into her questions, then we can quite make sense of Yeah,

Bret 43:16
I don't, it seems to me if we're talking five prime, if we're talking sense, an inverse sense, right? We are looking at an identity relationship. Right? Basically the same information. Trans Yeah, that's

Heather 43:31
just error correction. So you thought maybe chromatids, but that would be that's, that's, that's not DNA strands strands.

Bret 43:36
Yeah. So I don't think so. But it's, you know, given that attacco there's a good chance that there's something in that question that we're just not getting from

Heather 43:44
it. And then the so the second part of the question, would you agree that all living things are engineered by tit for tat? Except for the number of variables?

Bret 43:53
Well, I guess I would say equilibrium is a very powerful concept if you have not spent time thinking about equilibrium, it is worth doing and that in some sense, I don't think it's tit for tat because

Heather 44:07
it's a tip for tat Ansari, but almost assume as dyadic right? It seems to be back and forth a Ba Ba Ba, right? an equilibrium accommodates more variables and so it's sort of built into the question but you can use

Bret 44:23
the dog is not like the second

Heather 44:26
you end up reaching equilibrium as many more than too often variables come to sort of an agreeable tension with one another. Yeah, I also don't like that explanation, but you're not going to grow in me like the dog. No, I

Bret 44:42
wouldn't burn out you like the dog does. For one thing, I'd be second best at it. And she's really good. Yes, yes. No, I yeah, I don't see it. I don't think it's tit for tat. I think it's some a higher order process that manifests as tit for tat under some circumstances, but tit for tat. Basically, is limited to the universe where there's something to be won. And, you know, in the case of the strands of DNA, the sense strand does not win at the expense of the inverse strand. So I think it's just not

Heather 45:15
not right. Whereas sister chromatids will be in in conflict with one another, you know, parents and offspring are in conflict with their you know, there's there's plenty of conflict to be found. There's plenty of evolutionary theory to be had. Right, but not, not in terms of the strands of DNA. Yep. Oh, final part of the same of echos question our explorer modes, tit for tat looking for new partners?

Heather 45:46
Again, I think it's I think it's not quite the right expansion. I don't think tit for tat is the thing that we're trying to expand here. I don't think it quite works. It's

Bret 45:54
an explorer mode. Let's say the simplest version of an explorer mode is, you know, critters trying to find a watershed they haven't found yet. Let's say we're talking about salmon, then it's not really looking, you know, the watershed isn't the partner to the salmon. The watershed is indifferent to the salmon. Yeah. So yeah,

Heather 46:11
not quite. And that's actually I mean, that's another that's something I don't think I don't know if we've mentioned ever yet in our live streams. But this distinction between having, you know, an organism coming up against an A biotic versus a biotic force. You know, they've some, Darwin famously described hostile forces. And he included in the hostile forces that an organism has to contend with which selection is responding to things, including weather, and Geography and climate, and also predators and competitors, and would be mates and pathogens, and the things that first less the biotic things, the weather and the climate and the geography. Do not respond to the organism who is responding to it. It is it is this immovable force that does what it does, regardless of whether or not you know, when a when a volcano erupts in their volcanoes Don't, don't give a damn there's there's no response there. Whereas predators, competitors, conspecifics, Hunter specifics, pathogens, all of these things can respond and can evolve in response, and therefore there's a tit for tat, that's possible. You can't have a tit for tat with a river.

Bret 47:14
No, you'll lose for one thing. invalidated your entire explanation. One glib remark But

Heather 47:24
well, actually, you know, with, with a river, you can you can change, you can actively change the course of a river and the river will then you know, move away from you. But it's not it's not. It's not the same as if it was an organism.

Bret 47:40
There's just a difference between realms in which there's an objective and realms in which there's an objective, right.

Heather 47:48
I had a vision yesterday, standing between riders and federal officers, what are the chances that a group of strong courageous patriots of various backgrounds could peacefully protest the riders? Would there be violence no matter what?

Bret 48:02
Yeah. Good thought, Yeah, question is who's who's ready? It has to be a large enough group and a reasonable enough group and a careful enough group to pull it off

Heather 48:14
in a group that doesn't. Somehow it has to not be reducible even if this is a complete lie, by the rioters to that's you know, Trump fascist that's Nazis. That's Oh, well,

Bret 48:30
I mean, right.

Heather 48:31
So how, like, how does that part can avoid Well,

Bret 48:34
you have to you have to be impervious to Yes, you will be accused of

Heather 48:39
partner but individuals being impervious doesn't mean that the New York Times won't tell the story it tells

Bret 48:45
the New York Times will tell the story, it tells you have to be impervious to that, too. And so, you know, look, we've lost the New York Times. I don't know whose idea that was, but somebody's got one. Now. It was it was bad. The New York Times is not a newspaper anymore, and that's a big loss. It's not a new loss. It's been coming for a long time and the last vestiges of reason are fleeing the building. But literally, yeah, yeah.

Heather 49:16
From my daughter days, one what causes White's treefrogs laetare us earlier to change color she's watched hers do so for years to the wood frog. Leather babies so that is what causes their heart to restart after cryopreservation

Bret 49:32
Oh yeah, Heather.

Heather 49:36
Let me go with the wood frog first. That's a new genus you're giving it I assume that this is this it's just had a name change since I last checked in with this frog. If it is the frog, I'm thinking of it is in his present in sort of the middle, mid continental North America us up into southern Canada and these frogs are actually get frozen solid, frozen solid, not just their hearts. But during hard winters, they estimate the Barrett they bury under, and then they don't even keep anything going. They just become ice cubes. Like if you dig them up, and you drop them, they shatter. And we're not advising that you do that they don't restart after they shatter frogs. You heard it here first frogs do not restart after they shatter.

Bret 50:25
Unlike starfish.

Heather 50:28
You could shatter a starfish,

Bret 50:30
you can prune the legs off. Yeah, that's a little different from shattering, less dramatic.

Heather 50:35
Yeah, yeah. Okay. Well, these are the tools we have as biologists. Yeah. So what is the actual mechanism of restarting? I don't know, like the cellular level. But there is a kind of anti freeze, I think in these guys, that basically begins to circulate as the frog begins to thaw. And they can only deal with so many Well, so, so slow if freeze thaw cycle, and so many of them within X number of weeks. And so, you know, particularly chaotic springs, for instance, can leave a, you know, an Iowa landscape bereft of these frogs, because they just they don't come out of it successfully. But if they thaw slowly and better off, if it's just once they, they restart, but I don't I don't have there's a big black box there in the explanation that I don't know more about,

Bret 51:28
I'm gonna take a crack at it. Okay, I'm going to predict that predict is one of these things where it's prediction because I don't know, it doesn't mean nobody knows. But I'm going to predict that there is a battery like set of cells that is positioned in the tissue, such that it does not take what little energy it has accumulated. And fire it off too early. That is to say, while the heart is still partly frozen, and therefore were damaged itself or be unable to start, there is some battery that on that thaws at the right moment that the heart is capable of restarting. It's not too early, it's not too late. And that it sends a signal to the pacemaker, which basically functions as a defibrillator.

Heather 52:18
Like that. Yeah. Yeah. I don't know if that's true.

Bret 52:21
Nope. Either way. Yeah. It's a prediction.

Heather 52:24
With regard to the whites tree frogs. What causes them to change color, I do not remember what the mechanism is on those guys. There are a number of mechanisms of color change in mostly reptiles, but also a few frogs that involve basically chromatophores these things in the skin that can that can flip that are often usually a effectively a toggle, and they're binary, and they can go from one to the other. But obviously, there were some that were in reptile space, not just chameleons that have a continuum. And that's a different mechanism. And I don't know what Toria do

Bret 53:01
cephalopod molluscs have I think a wide range

Heather 53:04
here and I think they I think that that's a different evolution entirely whereas I think what's going on in a few frogs and many more squadmates is a shared I think, a shared evolution, whereas the cephalopods is going to be different evolution of color change. I'm gonna say I fish too, so I don't know if the fish like the actin ops like refund fish that do this is a separate evolution from the other vertebrates.

Bret 53:26
I don't know. Yeah, and even if they are separate evolutions, probably there's some precursor that they share. Yeah, so this is the way it is with the vision pigments and stuff. But I think it's melancholy that causes these frogs to change color

Heather 53:40
melancholy. Yeah. I think that's probably right. Frogs are sad lot.

Bret 53:45
Oh, sometimes. I did see probably on Reddit recently somebody posted in maybe it's the nature is fucking lit subreddit. A video of a cephalopod. I think an octopus

Heather 54:02
is a child's question man.

Bret 54:04
Oh, sorry. Well, it's just it's a subreddit

Unknown 54:08
just quoting I didn't name

Bret 54:10
it. In any case, they posted a video of a an I am sure it was an octopus. changing color unit dreamstate which raises all kinds of dreams they did you say? Sure.

Heather 54:25
How do we know?

Bret 54:26
Well, because it appears to be in a dormant also cephalopods dream. That's the thing is it's like how many different convergences are because this

Heather 54:35
persona Just so you know, how is it that we can so quickly say our color change in cephalopods is going to be a different evolution from color change in vertebrates, and even more easily immediately conclude, well, if cephalopods of occupy and squid or some of them dream, that it's gonna be a separate evolution of dreaming than what we have? Because we see evidence of dreams in many mammals. I don't know if there's any evidence Some birds. But I don't think that I've seen anyone discuss the possibility of dreamstate and anything other non mammalian vertebrates, which means the most recent common ancestor of humans, mammals, and cephalopods is, how many hundreds of millions of years ago? Like, six, seven? I don't know, I'm making that number up. But more than it's early? I don't know. Yeah, I don't know. And those organisms weren't dreaming, because we have no evidence of dreaming in almost any organisms that we've looked at. So these guys are dreaming. So it looks loudly now?

Bret 55:36
Well, you know, I guess you would say, you would have brain activity.

Heather 55:42
That different evolution of brains?

Bret 55:45
Yeah, never. and evolution of brains would be able to detect the electrical impulses associated with processing that is taking place while the animals not taking in new data. Yeah. And I would say, you know, painting with a broad brush, that's dreams.

Heather 56:01
is at least processing whether or not there's, I guess, dreams for us is always tied into visual cortex stuff, right? Yep. There's there's at least memory of visual stuff. Even I believe, for blind people. Right? So we obviously can't interview the Occupy yet a week out. They just don't cooperate. Do they? Really, they're not interested now. So we can see that there's processing going on, but we don't know what the subjective experience was like for them. What would it take for you guys to pick up and leave Portland? You try it?

Bret 56:40
Well, let's see. I've had several phone calls in the last week suggesting that would be a good idea. Interestingly, several of those calls came from California where people are actually picking up and leaving. So yeah, we're in kind of a pickle.

Heather 56:54
When we moved here, from Olympia, we told our children that we wouldn't move again, we wouldn't move them again, before they were done with school, which seemed really important because of the the total chaos that they experienced, because of what happened at evergreen. Yeah. So that is that is something that keep an end. You know, there's so much about Portland and the Pacific Northwest to love. But certainly there are certain there are things that could cause us to leave,

Bret 57:27
for example, like perhaps defunding the police and leaving us to fend for ourselves.

Heather 57:34
Yeah.

Bret 57:37
I just don't know what else to think. I mean, at some level, it's such a dumb experiment to run. But how successful are we likely to be defending ourselves against? Who knows what?

Heather 57:50
Yeah, we have a dog that moans. What is the likelihood of a free and fair election in November? I'm concerned that the current unrest could emerge on election day and undermine the democratic process. widespread violence can suppress and intimidate voters.

Bret 58:08
Yeah, unity. 2020 might be the way to go on that. I mean, what are the I don't I don't know what the chances are the what are the chances that it's going to be 100%? free and fair, there's zero because no election in a large population is going to be 100%. free and fair, will somebody file a phony ballot somewhere? But what are the chances that the election is free enough and fair enough that it actually represents the will of the people pretty high? What are the chances that the will of the people is coherent? pretty low? Unless of course you consider unity 2020, then of course, it could but you know, voting for either of these major parties. That's not really the will of the people so much. That's the will of the people, given constraints that are absolutely, unimaginably foolish.

Heather 58:57
How can we progress with effective reform of use of force police? No, let me start again. How can we progress with effective reform of use of force policies and procedures? When demands are being made by those with zero expertise? And we're officer safety is clearly absent. I'm a l e. o parentheses Ireland. I don't know what l e O stands for.

Bret 59:19
So astrological sign?

Heather 59:22
I think not. But

Bret 59:24
I don't know. I mean, the question is obviously a good one. Yeah, you cannot allow people who know nothing about this process and may in many cases not even be well intentioned to dictate terms you just can't it would be insane to do so. And so you know, when you've got three West Coast mayors now playing with these ideas, something has gone very seriously awry. No,

Heather 59:49
I think what's her London breed? Is it in San Francisco as well for Yeah, yeah. Yeah. Have you seen German contact tracing event plan for 1000 at the concert event in August. Please comment. I haven't seen this from just that really brief blurb it sounds intriguing. Yeah, if they're going if they're going to have a big concert than the idea that they're going to contact trace afterwards, potentially provides a huge epidemiological database. That will be, you know, great if no one's sick, and how super useful if a few people do get sick, and then we see how it spreads.

Bret 1:00:30
does remind me

Heather 1:00:33
law enforcement officer,

Bret 1:00:35
alright, so not an astrological sign, not

Heather 1:00:37
a lion.

Bret 1:00:40
It does remind me that I promised we would talk about COVID on today's live stream and events in Portland and their implications overwhelmed that plan. So we will bump that to the next live stream.

Heather 1:00:53
All right. Exactly an hour. Okay, we will do four more. Okay. Mainstream anthropology explains that humans have become agriculturalists, only 10,000 years ago. could this have been a reemergence of culture following a global Cataclysm? Might there be an evolutionary bio angle to this idea? So the evidence the archaeological evidence suggests that agriculture evolved convergently, separately, many places, ranging from 10 to 12,000 years ago, and then a few places like the New World, probably more recently than that, but it certainly, but certainly in isolation in the new world. And there's there's no archaeological evidence to suggest agriculture from, you know, 20 or 30, or more than that 1000 years ago. So I don't, NGO, we have both gone looking for the the strange the fringe the what if ideas around, you know, a lot of human prehistory, including the origins of agriculture, so I don't think I also, I've just never even seen any glimmerings of like, I found this and it's been buried because mainstream. anthropology doesn't want to hear this.

Bret 1:02:09
That said, I will be anything but shocked if there are precursors that are more agricultural than we understand. Oh, yes. people having noticed that seeds produce plants may drop those seeds in places that they would find convenient to go forward later. Likely it exists just as there are precursors of evolutionary thinking that have largely been lost to history. Some things are so important, canonical, clear. For those who have been thinking about them that my guess is there will be precursors.

Heather 1:02:47
Yeah. And the order of operations isn't inherently what it would seem. So for instance, bread seems to predate agriculture in? Boy, I think it's two places, I think maybe South China, agriculture seems to have emerged twice, probably independently within within modern China. And I think it's in southern China, and maybe in Mesopotamia, there's evidence of bread before agriculture. So that's not exactly to this point. But the idea that things go in this, you know, obviously, linear progression. And, you know, ceramics, too, were widespread in some places, long before agriculture, whereas in some places, probably agriculture, you know, basically created the need for vessels in which to hold grains. So these things, these things are very different in the many, many places where they have evolved. Hi, this question begins. I believe that Jay Cole describes the afro American size of existence eloquently, he would probably work with you for unity 2020. Are you familiar with him? Nope. Nope. I don't know Jay Cole either has equity mark that that's line 84. It looks like. Second to last question, viral exposure as metaphorical transfusion of virions. Question mark. It explains the benefit of recipient type O and dependence upon a and b within population for resistance to novel virus. For instance, China versus South American blood type distributions against COVID-19.

Bret 1:04:21
I don't get it on one reading.

Heather 1:04:22
Yeah, viral exposure as metaphorical transfer of Trent. I think transfusion isn't maybe the right word since mentioned the transmission of verions. And I don't know what is the first viral exposure I wrote forkel over as metaphorical transmission of virions.

Bret 1:04:44
Are they talking about non successful infections in which contact is creating an as if vaccine? Is that the Yeah,

Heather 1:04:56
I think that's right. And then the now explains the benefit of recipient type.

Heather 1:05:03
Oh. But then, you know, it falls apart a little bit.

Heather 1:05:08
The very question isn't quite accurate in terms of what I haven't looked into this in the last month and a half or so or two months. But early on, it looked like oh was resistant to COVID-19. But a was particularly susceptible A B with B and A, B, were not particularly susceptible. So it wouldn't just be a blanket like do you have you know, do you have things stuck to your do your blood or not, right? It's not Oh, versus a B and A, B, A, B and A B. So it's not it's not at least clean. But there, there might be something here this is a question we need to engage with the person to get more out of it. Final question. My homeschooled son is off to college soon. Tmu.

Bret 1:05:56
Don't remember I can't wait. Texas a&m.

Heather 1:05:59
Texas a&m. Yep, Texas a&m. I've tried to inoculate him against the mind virus. I'm more worried about him getting the mind virus and Coronavirus, Which do you think is worse? Wow.

Bret 1:06:14
Well, hopefully, you have laid the groundwork to make resistance to the wolke virus. highly likely. I would say the thing about Coronavirus is we just don't know how bad it is yet. Because we don't know whether or not you gain immunity. That's long lasting. We don't know whether it hides in some tissue and recurs.

Heather 1:06:37
If it's evolving towards more virulence or less right, towards more transmissibility outside,

Bret 1:06:43
we do know that it does an awful lot of organ damage in some people. So I would say, let's put it this way. If your son comes home having been infected by the virus, he could awaken from that zombie like state and regain his sense of reality, the COVID thing, you're just rolling the dice with respect to what kind of damage it's going to do and how long lasting it is. So

Heather 1:07:12
I honestly don't, I appreciate the question very much. And I don't even know how to put the two things next to each other. I don't know how to compare the risks here. Yeah. Even though you know, the mind virus, the woke mind virus very much is acting like a virus. And so it seems like we should be able to answer this question. But they pose. We believe as if you're watching this, you know, that the world virus poses actually an existential threat to civilization.

Bret 1:07:43
Yes, but your son's participation in it doesn't change how threatening it is to civilization.

Heather 1:07:47
All right, and your sons, your sons, you know, brief dipping into it and emerging perhaps inoculated more strongly than he would have been might render him more powerful in the world, whereas a brief dip into Coronavirus probably does not make him stronger. So it's that's a tough one. And I'm sort of sorry to leave without without any kind of resolution on that. However, we have reached the end here. And once again, we'll say we're doing

Bret 1:08:20
and of the live stream, don't panic, we have not reached the end of anything else that we're aware of

Heather 1:08:25
nothing. We've reached the end of nothing check the

Bret 1:08:28
internet after we're offline here. But hopefully nothing I

Heather 1:08:32
won't. I'm done. You're out. I am out I am. I'm going to go outside and for some time in nature. But tomorrow we will both be back online at 11am for a private q&a for people who have joined my patreon at $5 or up we have way too many questions already. But we will try to juggle that and figure out how to answer them at either our Patreon at $5. Up, you can get access to the discord. There's a clips channel where some of the little bits from these get posted. Now, what else? I think we'll be back to plan is to be back on Tuesday. We'll probably start dropping these to one a week. some point soon, but for now, we'll be back on Tuesday.

Bret 1:09:15
Okay, like Subscribe, comment, circulate, all those things. Those are all helpful to us. We appreciate your support and until next time, be well

This transcript was generated by https://otter.ai