Bret 0:07
Hey folks, welcome to the Dark Horse podcast. This is I believe our 1312 live stream. Is that correct? That

Heather 0:16
is right.

Bret 0:16
That was what I came up with. All right. Well, we are weird happens

Heather 0:20
when you do back of the envelope math

Bret 0:22
back. Yeah, the envelope was wet. So I guess it was a little difficult to do. But number 25 number 25. Actually, okay, good. So I thought actually, in light of the way things are going instead of opening with some kind of a light anecdote or a story or a joke that we would instead try five seconds of violence just to get us in sync. 12345 Here we go. All right, we've gotten that was internalized violence. So that was Oh, no. Silence is violence, pure and simple. There's no internalized at all. miss it. How did you miss it? Wow. Okay. Yeah, yeah. Okay. But anyway, now we're pumped and ready to go. Yeah. We're going to talk about all the things that have taken place since our last livestream. We skipped one because we had other material arising. But

Heather 1:13
you mean, we skipped talking about the modern moment as much, because because you'd been a Rogen, and we talked a bit about the story that you alluded to, but did not talk did

Bret 1:23
not talk about to Joe? Yes, yes. So we have lots of stuff that's built up in the hopper.

Heather 1:28
Yeah, so much, so much more than then we will get to of course, can I start by saying that I listened to your conversation with the first conversation that you've had with john McWhorter. That's up on the Dark Horse podcast and on this YouTube channel. And it is extraordinary. I mean, I, I hardly know him. But I of course, have the deepest respect for both of you. And you're watching to people engage in good faith around complex issues about which you don't exactly see the same thing is truly remarkable. I didn't actually watch it. I listened to it as a podcast in the car. But I imagine watching even added a little bit more more nuance. One thing that came up for me, you know, I've been I've been, I have found mcquarters contention that this is a religious movement, and that this is not really metaphor, even that this is akin to religion, that this is like religion, a very compelling argument for years now. And I think it was a 2018 article that he wrote that really put it into sharp relief for me. And I was wondering, though, whether, and you know, maybe this is something you can ask him when you're on with him next, whether he would call the Cultural Revolution and Maoist doctrine, a religion as well. What do you what do you think you have any opinions on that?

Bret 2:50
Yeah, my guess would be that he will think that there is an over a lot of overlap. Yeah. And I guess the question I would have is, given your in my perspective about what religion is and how it came about that it is an evolutionary phenomenon, that this may actually be an empirical question. Right? There may actually be circuitry that is called into play when one goes into a religious modality. And so it may, you know, it may be a matter of a brain scan could reveal whether somebody is in that mindset or not.

Heather 3:24
Yeah, I mean, I guess I tend to think of religious belief and, you know, the tenants that have stood the test of time, and merging slowly and becoming dominant over time. And so the thing that has seemed so dangerous about this current movement, that has been, you know, ongoing for decades, actually, but is it fever pitch right now, and simile about Maoism was that it was this top down authoritarian, extraordinarily quick thing. And actually, if I if I could just read a very brief paragraph. This is this is one of the books on the Cultural Revolution that I've been reading. I don't know how to pronounce the guy's name is excellent Frank Coulter, Dutch, the third in a trilogy, the Cultural Revolution of People's History. 1960 to 1976. He has on page 168, a quotation from an office worker who's remembering 1968 sort of early Cultural Revolution. Every morning he says we would stand in front of this with our little red books and read aloud a few passages. Then waving little red book we would say three times Great Leader, teacher, helmsmen Chairman Mao, may you live 10,000 years and good health forever to Vice Chairman limbo. It struck me as absurd, almost like a religion. Most of us felt that way as I was to discover after the Cultural Revolution. At the time, however, no one in their right mind would dare say so openly, let alone discuss it. That seems so much like what we're seeing now this the culture of fear that is spreading and as I have sent to you in the last couple of days, and I actually just tweeted just before we went on I think there is a close analogy to be made between Mao's Little Red Book and Robin de Angelo's white fragility. These these books are being passed around, they're being waved as badges of, of true believer ship, and also as ways to basically bludgeon those who don't fall into line.

Bret 5:21
Yeah, I remember, you know, and again, our audience will be somewhat tired of hearing how much of this just echoes rather exactly what we went through at evergreen, you know, sort of miniature version. But I remember the first time I heard the term white fragility, where I had made what I thought was a very careful argument about what I thought was and was not present at evergreen and why it was important that we not not up end the sciences, for example, in the process of, you know, hunting a non existent enemy, and a, an American Indian colleague of ours challenged me and just simply asserted that I was evidencing white fragility. And I thought, Wait a minute, there's no way to make an argument in this realm, because either I agree with you. But if I disagree with you, then it is inherently evidence that I don't get it yet. And so you know, it's it's, you know,

Heather 6:20
if she floats, she's a witch, right? Heads, I

Bret 6:23
win. Tails, you lose, right?

Heather 6:25
It's it's all of these things. There it is. It is rigged. It is completely rigged against anyone who wants to engage the questions. With with substance,

Bret 6:35
yes, and it is not rigged subtly, it is rigged transparently. And the basic point at some level is okay, you can try to wriggle out. But we have enough power to force you to this ultimately. So as you Wriggle, you will find yourself more and more punished. And at some point, you'll wise up and you'll say Ah, now I get it. And you know, it's

Heather 6:57
as if as if falling into place as an ally is actually a safe position. Because there is there is no safety here. There is no safe position.

Bret 7:05
No, it's like cannon fodder. You're going to be part of the infantry, and it's going to be a short ride. That's right.

Heather 7:11
That's right. So I know we've got we've got a lot to talk about here. But I wondered if I could show a few photographs that I took just today during a short walk around a quaint Portland Southwest Portland neighborhood have signs on poles. So this is a pretty white neighborhood as Portland is pretty gentrified. I think it's a little commercial area, it's Multnomah village. And within about a five block area, I took cut 20 photographs, and some of them some of these are not high quality. I'm going to show 14 or so here 14 I think here and i'd love us to just talk about them. And then at the end that's a good segue to talk about Black Lives Matter. So Zack if you want to show so these are again these are posters that I saw in a in a bout five block radius in southwest Portland today on June 23 2020. And for those who are who will be listening and not seeing this one says Black Lives Matter hands up Don't shoot color is not a crime. Okay, that makes sense. And you've got people drawn it's you know, the artwork is is good. It's interesting, and people in masks behind it. So that looks that looks like an honorable representation of what Black Lives Matter is claiming to be

Bret 8:32
it's a warm image of this protest.

Heather 8:35
Absolutely. Let's see next. Next one so sorry about the lighting here. It's super bright and hot out here in Portland today. A few simple truths that I believe this one says no one should live in fear. Murder is wrong no matter what uniform you wear. And justice shouldn't be something we have to demand. I'll be done marching when I see a change. This too I find completely honorable. And it was actually it was this was in the window of a metal arts shop and I thought it was actually going to be like a book art shop printmaking. And maybe they have letterpress in there but this looks like a handmade letterpress sign with completely honorable sentiments you know all of these things anyone who can't get behind no one should live in fear or murder is wrong no matter what uniform you wear. That actually indicates a problem in the head of that person if they think people should be living in fear now Now we are moving into slightly more ideological already memed sentiments no justice no peace which is one of the things you'll hear chanted Black Lives Matter and this is folded. So you it is actually spelled correctly there with now familiar Black Lives fist but also you know, the hands reaching up we can imagine this, you know, people reaching for justice and trying to do right so

Bret 9:59
so Can I just point out? Yeah, no telling what was on the artists mind, but that fist and those hands are not a match. Those hands are comparatively dainty. And that fist is robust. I wonder if there's not a subtle message about what they wrongly call ally ship here? No, that's

Heather 10:24
interesting. Yeah. So the anthropological term would be sort of grey style versus robust forms, in which the gray style firms are the allies. And the robust, which is say the stronger and physically more dominant forms are the are the powerful ones. Yeah. And of course, one of the things about being a human is that we have moved farther away from making right in general, we have, we have been able to do that through our complex sociality. And frankly, through our laws and our morals,

Bret 10:57
yes, alliances make strong, but then that raises all sorts of questions about these alliances, which are created through this process that we talked about at the beginning, where the only right answer is yes, I agree. And then once you agree, you'll get your orders.

Heather 11:11
That's right. Okay, next one. We cannot allow their voices to go unheard anymore. This is a hand written sign, hashtag justice for all. Hashtag BLM, hashtag silence is violence, their allusion to what you were suggesting earlier, and then up at the top hashtag amplify melanated voices, which that's not, that's not a thing. And that's dehumanizing, again, right? This brown and black bodies, trope that is emerging is dehumanizing, as is the idea of melanated voices. On the other hand, we cannot allow their voices to go unheard anymore. You know, I object to the any more the same way I object to the second a and magga. Actually, it's exactly the same thing. Make America Great, let's do it. Make America Great for everyone. Because it wasn't great for everyone at any point in the past. And this is a point you have made repeatedly, we cannot allow their voices to go and hurt for sure. We everyone needs to be able to have a voice in a democracy, but anymore. Look at the history in this country over the years since the Civil Rights Movement and and ask yourself who actually is being disappeared by the mainstream media. And the idea that there are whole demographics whose voices aren't heard. And this is the moment that we must change that is, is not reflective of what we have the reality We've been living.

Bret 12:38
It's not it's really not reflective. And I like your point about the analogy here to magga. There's something psychological about the statement in which you are already rooting for the statement at the point you get to the twist at the end that forces you to agree to something that isn't true. Exactly. And it's really, I think, you have to, you have to read through the whole thing before you say anything about what you think about it. And then

Heather 13:04
we all do this thing that I'm doing right now nodding along, like I'm gonna like nod along to you, because if you end up saying something crazy, a you don't tend to, you know, in my estimation, but also I can then be like, you know what, actually, no, but, you know, we're being asked to sign on to these things. Yes, we cannot allow their voices to go on heard. Period. Yes. Make America great. Period. Yeah.

Bret 13:24
And, you know, the risk of alienating many, many people, I have been paying attention to Tucker Carlson's little essays that he puts on nightly of late, and I must say, there's something 25% of each one that feels like, it's pandering to a particular constituency, there's a good 75% of them. That is right on target. And it strikes me as quite patriotic and open minded. And, you know, he pointed out the other night, we have elected a black president, right? And we can try to parse that any way we want. But at some level, the idea that black voices are unheard is just simply inconsistent with the history that we all know and the same thing was true at evergreen. White supremacy is alive and well at evergreen it's everywhere. We had a black president For how long have the college the college right and so

Heather 14:24
in any case, the point is for the entire duration of the black president the united states last person was president of the college and for a time before and after that as well

Bret 14:30
right and you know, this claim erupted full force at the place where we were dedicating a building to that President and you know, he was there to speak and he was interrupted in order to challenge white supremacy. It's just it's preposterous, the juxtaposition is really Stark, but at the point that you say something like, well, I can't sign on to that statement. It's like a hot new it white fragility, right, you know?

Heather 14:57
Exactly. Alright, next Next sign racism and police violence happen here. It says in the past month alone attacks George Floyd Ahmed. Oh boy, I'm gonna butcher these names Ahmed arbury. Briana Taylor and Tony McDade have been brutally murdered by police officers. This could happen any day in our community, we cannot remain silent. So how can I help donate your money and time to contact your local reps and demand accountability, three talk sense into racist family members and friends. Again, saw the sentiments here, right? We this could happen in our community, maybe racism and police violence happen here? What is the here? This is in a neighborhood in a city where there has been a killing of a black man at the hands of the police officers in the last couple of years, which is quite contentious with regard to what the specifics were. And it seems pretty clear to everyone that there was there was confusion and perhaps intent on the part of the the young man who was killed. These things did not happen here. So here we have the gaming of the language and the flyers where you get you get an immediate emotional response, racism and police violence happen here. Right, here are the names of the people. Right, those aren't here. And that's not to say that we aren't all living in a society that does have racism and police violence. But this is this is beginning to melt into actual lies. I think.

Bret 16:32
So. And it also dovetails with some things that we've talked about earlier. The the strangeness of the protests at Yale, where Nicholas Christakis, you know, one of the most decent people that we've ever encountered is challenged as is as if he is vile by people who are claiming oppression who are highly privileged. Right, the whole thing just cannot be made to add up if you take it at face value. We are seeing protests spread from the US to other places, we've started to get contacts from our friends in Britain, who are watching a protest, that doesn't make any sense because the relationship between black Europeans and white Europeans is not an exact mirror for what goes on in the US. They're quite different. This is palpable to us when we have traveled there. And yet, the internet is causing this wave of centum. I guess, maybe I put it this way. Because the mechanism of transmission is contagion. Right? It's not persuasion, it's contagion. And because it's contagious, because it's built to be contagious. The point is, well, what's to stop it from being contagious across an ocean, if we are as close as our screens to what's taking place over there. So the little traps that, you know, cause us to, you know, Chase, our tails here in North America are also causing people who happen to speak the same language to be chasing their tails in the British Isles, even if it doesn't apply. And so this is a huge danger. And at some point, I think we need to talk about people have an old model of what to fear. And because you would imagine that revolution would grow from a central point in some way. But in fact, what it's done is it's made a demographic transition where a lot of nonsense was fed into a lot of kids heads in college, and those people then went into institutions. It's like, oh, guess what? sleeper cell inside of every institution have a certain size and a certain size is like, above 20? People?

Heather 18:37
Yeah. And the nonsense was not just fed into kids heads in college, it's in the K 12 schools. And it has been for a while, because the schools of Ed have been have been captured for at least, you know, for at least a decade or more. Yeah, as you know, there's a good essay by a friend of ours on this, which rather than butcher the title, I will find it and speak to directly another time. But yeah, even even worse, that children, not just college students who are who are children in many regards yet, but actual children are being indoctrinated

Bret 19:08
children who inherently by the nature of children have no mechanism to protect against what they're being told is the truth, right, that we are supposed to protect them from dangerous falsehoods at that age. So they're open to things that adults will tell them. And we are now our schools of ads are now feeding this mind virus into these young heads with no defense mechanism. And it only gets worse from there. That's

Heather 19:37
right. Okay, next next poster, bad apples spoil the bunch. demand that the Multnomah County Commissioner divest money from racist policing initiatives and jails and redirect funds for housing, mental health services, schools and more. So let me just show the next two as well because they're all in this sort of defund the police

Bret 19:58
bit. I want to come back to the Apple stock. Okay, well,

Heather 20:01
so let me show the next two and then all $245,169,804 for policing, it says No, thank you. We'd rather have accessible food programs. Care, not cops PBX. Okay, and the next one in the same vein $245,169,804 for policing. Question mark? No, thank you. We'd rather have free public transportation. At care, not cops PBX. Okay, go for it.

Bret 20:31
Yeah, well, I guess thanks, I, you know, $30 for a family dinner, we'd rather have an Xbox, you know, it's like, swapping these things in here. A Do you know what that amount is? Are you in a position to evaluate how reasonable that amount is. And also just the idea of, we'd rather have this than that. My point would be, you want to talk about the problem with policing fully up for an adult conversation about even throwing out the entire model and replacing it with something that works better, but you want to tell me you want to start by removing the police, you're telling me you don't understand the first thing about what civilization is and how it runs. And you imagine somehow, that whatever was before civilization you can return to and you haven't stopped to think about the density that we live at. You don't understand why you may be decrying violence that shouldn't be there and it shouldn't be there but you have no idea how much violence would be there if you pulled out the thing that stops it even corrupt terrible cops prevent violence by virtue of the fact that when violence happens cops get called and the even the terrible ones are, you know, maybe the most frightening ones to encounter so

Heather 21:46
that's right. And once again, here we have an emotional ploy. You don't think we should defund the police? What are you against public transportation? You don't think we should defund the police? What are you against accessible food programs? How dare you? You don't think people should eat? You don't think people should be able to get to their jobs and their families? If they can't pay for it? How dare you sir?

Bret 22:07
It's it's an attack on your values. Yeah. And it is enough to drive a systems thinker insane because these things aren't hooked up. It's not like a blue Lego you can swap out for a red one. It's you know, it's something totally different. So yeah, that the apples one, I do want to go back and say that Apple spoil the bunch not to spoil the bunch. That is actually the original sentiment. Now almost every time I hear bad apples invoked, it is invoked in a way that is incoherent. right to say, well, it's not that the police are bad. It's a few bad apples suggested those apples haven't tainted anything else here at least they've got that. Right. Right. The whole idea is well, if you think the bunches Okay, you don't understand the nature of bad apples, they can the whole thing. But now the question is, is it does that apply to things like policing? Right? That's an interesting question. Yeah.

Heather 22:54
And I think it would be impossible for there not to be some effect of having a corrupt policeman in your midst. If you are, even if the rest of the police are not corrupt, that corruption does have an insidious, spreading effect. Yep.

Bret 23:11
Well, and let's just say one of the things that we're learning relatively late in our understanding of what human beings are and how they function is how many things are contagious, including things like happiness, you know, you walk into a room with a dour look on your face. And it actually spreads, you walk into a room with a smile on your face, it spreads. And it actually changes the circuitry. It changes your understanding of your own mental state, which is why guys on the make are so fond of telling women, they should smile more, because the point is if you can get a woman to smile, even by tricking her into doing it, she'll think she likes you better than she actually does. So, anyway, all of

Heather 23:46
the great dating advice from Brett Weinstein. Sorry, no, this is I mean, this is a point that we should come back to some more time to But absolutely,

Bret 23:55
but just the number of things that are contagious that are now contagious over the internet across an ocean that make for a completely incoherent narrative where suddenly, you know, police violence happens here in a place where police violence may be exceedingly rare. Yeah, by virtue of the fact that here seems like it encompasses everybody who has a conversation in a language you can understand. So, back to our earlier point about losing our minds. Yeah, right. Okay.

Heather 24:21
Let's see. This is a little hard to read sorry. It may take a while to comprehend your role and racist problems. But keep in mind that people are dying while they wait for you. And then it attributes this quote to someone named Jen Winston of Black Lives Matter. This is a claim that is now simply being trotted out all the claims and white fragility in the book. That is untestable because your world your role in racist systems is so vague. You know why? systems are racist, what makes them racist? And what is your role? That it is it is untestable. And so we are told and I think actually no one of these maybe I didn't include it as the picture was bad advises that, you know, you can't just be not racist, you must be anti racist. And this speaks exactly to some of what you and john McWhorter were talking about. It is the quote unquote, anti racist movement that is their religious movement, just and it's, it shows that they're good at PR, right? anti fog. If you're anti fascist, yeah, well, then if you're anti anti fascist, you must be pro fascist. If you're anti or anti racist, you must be pro racist. And of course, that's not actually true. That disagreeing with these movements makes you the thing that they claim to be fighting against, because it's really easy to claim to be fighting against something.

Bret 25:52
Well, I think we need to start engaging the idea that these are not terms and claims they are moves, just moves. Yeah, they are moved. This is a system and if you try to navigate by intuition, you will find yourself it's pawn there's no escaping it. Yeah. So I remember actually, the first time I heard the term anti racist, it was totally positive. Okay. First time I heard it was in the four o'clock meeting at evergreen where violence nearly broke out several times. And

Heather 26:24
several on the first day of the protests that were turning into calling for

Bret 26:29
my head, I decided to go to the meeting, they complained about the fact that I was there because what a guy who thought he was in danger, come to a meeting like this. Now, of course, I hadn't felt that I was in danger until that meeting. But in any case, I was there and several extremely courageous students stood up to defend me, including several students of color, right? Your students, my student knew you knew me, I felt it imperative that they speak on my behalf, which I still am honored by their willingness to confront a very angry mob when in fact, they would be targeted for doing so including

Heather 27:03
at least a couple of like small bodied women of color. Like, you know, people who could easily have been in physical risk, even if other people weren't,

Bret 27:13
and one such woman stood up in that meeting, that tape exists. You can look at Benjamin Boyce's documentation of that meeting, and you can see her defending me and she says, not only is he not racist, he's anti racist. And I heard her say that I thought, I never thought to use that term. Never heard it. But what a lovely thing for someone to say about you, right? And now I feel about it exactly as I feel about feminism. There was a time when I would have said I was a feminist because I thought what feminism meant was equal opportunity for women. And of course, I'm for that. But obviously feminists frankly,

Heather 27:47
the National Organization for Women thought enough of you to give you an award to that effect. That it back when you were fighting, both racism and misogyny on the campus of Penn, the first college that you went to,

Bret 28:00
yep. But you know, you sign up for these things. I'm not even sure when feminism became a term that I couldn't get behind. But at some point, it was like No way, right? That's not third

Heather 28:12
wave went off the rails in the 90s. Again, a topic for many other conversations, right?

Bret 28:15
But my point is, there's no you can't even just navigate there's no basis to navigate other than I want you to write down the definition I'm not signing on to any word you can't define which you know is

Heather 28:31
all I want a stable definition that I can refer back to so they can't just say oh, no, that's not what we ever meant.

Bret 28:35
Yep, yeah.

Heather 28:38
Sorry. Okay, here we go. This is this is what I call it Don't hurt me. Well, this is a business that's put up as many of these as as they possibly can, hoping presumably they don't get vandalized. Now, this isn't a part of Portland that hasn't been vandalized. Yet, but, but one never knows. And just to close up on one of these is if you are a person who believes in love, justice, integrity and equity for all people, then you know that this work is non negotiable, says Laila upside, again, Black Lives Matter. So once again, we are being told and we cashed it, we hear this at evergreen as well. Yeah, if you do not sign on not only to our conclusion, but also our methods and everything about what we are doing and how we are intending to accomplish it. Then, in this case, you do not believe in love, justice, integrity, equity for all those those cannot be values that you hold, if you do not follow us in lockstep.

Bret 29:40
And the bodies in that one are buried under the word this. This is what work this work is signed on to this work. Yes. Yeah, just

Heather 29:50
Yep. Okay. So here we're nearing the end of these commit to being anti racist. And there's a QR code and I'm going to show you what happen And when you look on that QR code when we get to the very end of these, which is just a couple more commit to being anti racist, another one donate, put your money where your mouth is, same QR code goes the same place. And before I show you where that goes, which is basically it's going to show you how you can put your money where your mouth is, you know, $30 for a family meal. How dare you Why don't you put your money to these now I'm, that's, I'm exaggerating, but you're to your point earlier, one final image that I took on the streets of what normal village in Portland today. Stonewall was a riot started by black and Latin x trans women. Bang Bang, bang. That seems like an outlier. Oh, heck is that doing? Yeah, write that down that so? Zack, if you could take down my screen for a minute, while I find what happens to what happens when we click through on that QR code? Here we are. Okay, so Zack, let's pull this back up. It's a compiled list of donation resources that are supposedly, you know, include providing bail money, among other things for people who have been taken in? And you know, otherwise, these all kind of sound right, except LGBTQ specific organization? What does that have to do with black lives matter? Well, let's just scroll down a little bit. And we very quickly find, okay, so Black Lives Matter good black trans travel fund. What, what is what is that, and then a mutual aid project developed in order to help provide black trans transgender women with the financial resources needed to be able to self determine safer alternatives to travel. So this isn't about black people. It's about black transgender people. And it's not even about black transgender people. It's about black trans women. So this is a point that I'm sure we will return to because this is becoming really a little terrifying about the connection here. But let me just that's not that's hardly the only trans thing on this list. And I say this, as someone, as I've made really clear, so many times, we have trans friends, we had trans students, transit, real trans is rare. This is being politicized, and, and is tearing down a lot of the important protections in society. So we have the trans women of color collective, the trans justice funding project, and there are a couple more up there that I Oh, and then you know, this once honorable organization, the splc, the Southern Poverty Law Center, which has become quite quite captured. So you can you can take that down. Now, Zack, I do want just one more thing, maybe as long as we're here before to say that Black Lives Matter, which is what this movement is supposedly about, should be an honorable movement. And so Zack, I guess if you want to put up the screen one more time, here's here's their actual website. This is the what we believe page of the Black Lives Matter website. And let me scroll down a little bit. And basically, they've got I have to find it. Sorry, here we are. This near the top, we are unapologetically black in our positioning, in affirming that black lives matter. We need not qualify our position to love and desire freedom and justice for ourselves as a prerequisite for wanting the same for others. I'm on board with that, that that seems acceptable to me, especially the first sentence, we are unapologetically black in our positioning. It's black lives matter as it should be. But third, lying, this isn't what they then do look down this list and find that we have no goodness, no, it's up here. We make space right below this close to the top of the list. We make space for transgender brothers and sisters to participate and lead were self reflexive and do the work required to dismantle cisgender privilege and uplift black trans folks, especially black trans women, again, and then the next one, oh, we build a space that affirms black women. Final in a list of three when women make up half of the population and actual trans people make up a tiny, tiny fraction of 1%. And then finally, we make our spaces family friendly and enable parents to fully participate with their children awesome hopes. We dismantle the patriarchal practice that requires mothers to work double shifts. So they can mother in private even as they participate in public justice work. I don't I'm not sure exactly what that's referring to. But the very next one is we disrupt the western prescribed nuclear family structure requirement by supporting each other's extended families and villages, how to keep going and collectively care for one another, especially our children. To the degree that mothers parents and children are comfortable

Bret 34:51
mothers, parents and children. A phrase a number of people have pointed out is carefully constructed to exclude fathers. They Could be included under parents, but they are not specifically labeled there for a reason.

Heather 35:05
And the idea that dismantling the nuclear family is in any way, centering Black Lives, when it's so clearly destructive of all lives. But actually, historically, and right now specifically destructive of black lives in America shows that this is not what it seems.

Bret 35:23
Yeah, you can take it off. It's not what it seems. So there's a lot to the question of what trans is doing here. And why trans trans black trans women is playing a specific role that it is so conspicuously evergreen was not a specially diverse campus racial, racially, right? It had only 4000 students total. The protest was involved a couple 100 people who were very actively involved three leaders, maybe the three leaders were maybe eight leaders, right? Maybe maybe I would say, a couple 100 v three leaders who showed up again and again, were black trans women,

Heather 36:13
you know that the the term that at least two of them use for themselves for black trans

Bret 36:17
was trans femme. So anyway, there's just something demographically conspicuous about that, right? There's something about people who are born male who transitioned to female and are black, who are somehow at the very forefront of this movement, despite their tiny, tiny numbers, this is to the exclusion, even to the extent that there's all of this very positive sounding language, about supporting these trans people. This is also to the exclusion of trans people who aren't black, and it is to the exclusion of trans trans men were born female, and ultimate transition male. So in some sense, one of the things that's going on here is that there's a trick of the mind right to say, we are protecting black trans women, women is a protected class because women have a built in disadvantage, at least strength wise, and also historically, power wise. So people who are born into that advantage, and then move into a protected class are a phenomenon we have to talk about, right? What is the proper mental reaction to this right? Is it to take the protections that we ordinarily reserved for women and to give them to anyone born male? who simply says, You know what? I'm female? And if so, do you expect anybody to take advantage of that opportunity? Who is not doing so on the basis that they are internally have this mindset? So

Heather 37:43
I would just say, Well, of course, there will be people who take advantage. And of course, if there is no hurdle to be jumped beyond claiming, now I'm a woman. Of course, there will be people who game that and we've seen it,

Bret 37:56
yep. I would also point out that the gigantic rally in New York, I can't remember if I showed it on the podcast, but it was a gigantic rally in New York. And basically, as far as I can tell, second to the hashtag Black Lives Matter in terms of the protest priorities was black trans lives lives matter was the hashtag. And so why? If the idea is that this is all people who face oppression, why would you limit that to black trans lives? Why wouldn't it just be trans lives matter? as a fellow traveler?

Heather 38:33
Honestly, I mean, if, if we were to take them at their word and say that this is an objection to police brutality, and the continuing in justices in the courts, and certainly historically racially unjust laws, which demographic within black people has suffered the most? It's young black men, right? It's young black women, like all black people have suffered at the hands of racist ideologies, in certainly historical and to some extent, modern us, but who has suffered the most within black people? It's black men. And why then, why then, are we talking? Why then are they focused on a demographic that is so tiny, and so new, that actually has a history with policing and the courts that can't probably extend back into even to the 20th century?

Bret 39:27
So at some level, it has something to do with the fact that, you know, this mentality, this intersectional mentality creates an unassailable bility, right, the unavailability appends to the number of categories that you can add together that you can say are having an emergent effect. And there's, you know, it we were talking earlier about the, the fact that these words don't function like normal words that they actually function like mechanisms that force you into acknowledgment that the whole slate of claims James is right. And, you know, this is another set like how do you wade into these waters, about transits? I mean, we're watching, you know, JK Rowling get into very hot water for saying very reasonable things about the need to continue to protect women and that transmits does not invalidate that need. So anyway, the waters are so fraught, that nobody can figure out how to navigate them, which is creating a juggernaut?

Heather 40:33
Well, it doesn't, it doesn't strike me as any sort of concerted conspiracy. But the ability for people to make the claim that they were trans absent intention or actual follow through with regard to hormonal or surgical modification and obvious gender dysphoria, and body gender dysphoria. And having the most of the liberal intelligentsia and mainstream media and academia say of course, if you say so yes. was even if not part originally, of the movement that became black lives matter. Certainly, it is clear the Black Lives Matter, observed that and said, that worked. What is it that we can do that can get people to roll over and accept these things that sound like if you don't agree with them, you must be a nasty human being. That's how it's that's how it's being done right now. Because although, until, you know, until 10 years ago, no one had ever heard of transphobia. And in fact, transphobia is not what it sounds like. But no one wants to be called a racist. No one wants to be called a misogynist. No one wants to be called a transphobic. Except transphobia is so clearly not what it means it doesn't have the historical manifestation that that racism does. And so people at first, like, Oh, I am alright, that's terrible. I don't, but you know, I have compassion for trans people. And, of course, what transphobia the point that you're accused of transphobia often what it means is that you're making the, you know, apparently outrageous, but actually biologically real and foundational claim that sex is real, and that we have an uninterrupted history of sexual dimorphism in sexual reproduction for 500 million years. Yeah, that's what that's what I mean, when I say sex is real. And that is the moment when I have been called a transphobic.

Bret 42:23
Well, transphobia is a tripwire. It's not a word. It's a tripwire. And there are several of them. transphobia is anything that suggests any kind of skepticism about any claim made within a half a mile of transmissive. Any kind. You've got turf, trans exclusionary radical feminist, which is the claim that you are, in fact, some kind of you are pushing some kind of aggressive ideology to have any doubt at all, that all protections normally awarded to women should be necessarily awarded to, to men who transitioned to female,

Heather 43:03
which includes, you know, not just, you know, if fully transitioned trans woman, what is her situation with regard to public bathrooms? And I say fully transitioned, in contrast to someone who's put on a dress and declare that because they like the color pink, they're a woman because No, they're not. But all the way over here to if you've declared yourself a woman, you get to you get to compete against women in sport. Yeah. Which, frankly, that is the reversal of the honest and wonderful part of Title Nine, like Title Nine happened in order to allow women to compete in sport and to get some funds to do so. And allowing men who declared themselves women, even if they've been on hormones, if they went through development as men, they should not be competing against women in sport. They shouldn't be it's not fair.

Bret 43:55
Yeah. And it is the backdoor on invention of legal structure is designed to protect the class it's the and protection of a class of people who were protected for this case, physical reasons.

Heather 44:08
Now, you just said to me yesterday about the intentional on protection of lately the unhooking of some legal structures in California. What was this?

Bret 44:16
Oh, geez, it was. Now I don't know how serious this effort is. But there was a where there is a ballot proposition to remove the prohibition against discrimination based on race,

Heather 44:32
sex, gender identity.

Bret 44:35
So that obviously opens a frightening door. But before we leave the trans question, so you've got trans phobe? Kind of all purpose, you've got turf, you've got trans medical list, and transcom which as far as I can tell her synonymous I

Heather 44:52
don't know why they haven't settled less than transcom. Well, it's like shopping chairs.

Bret 44:56
It's like shopping chairs. There's a there's an inability to resolve even the label On these things meaningfully but what that one means is that if you are a person who believes that true trans ness requires dysphoria then you are also have some sort of radical belief system and that really there is no threshold that would define the difference between true trans and anything else. And the real point is look you could make all these arguments but what's really being said is you are not under any circumstances circumstances allowed to make any counter argument or express any skepticism and this is going to be a hallmark of this entire movement which actually if I can can we put up the what what do you wanted to put up the one of these

Heather 45:45
pictures No, no, no Oh

Bret 45:50
yeah, it's a link to the story about the you Chicago Professor Okay, so here University of Chicago econ Professor career torn apart after criticizing defund the police and the basic premise here is that this professor in good standing tweeted that he did not think defunding the police was such a hot idea. And he was investigated and to the credit of the University of Chicago they decided there was nothing racist about what he had said but he would be my point A this was the University of Chicago This is the last stand right this is the college that has done the best at protecting freedom of expression it's not like the last

Heather 46:42
principles have been the beacon of hope for there's

Bret 46:47
a gold standard This is the gold standard Yes, but they didn't laugh off the claim that he was racist for believing that defunding the police was a bad idea and said so publicly they looked into it right so that's where we are a

Heather 47:02
tweet which second you just put it up one more time right at the bottom of what's on the screen here it shows the egregious perhaps firing worthy tweet I just grow up or can you show it to us on the main screen because we can't see that very read the bottom Too bad he wrote too bad but hashtag Black Lives Matter per its core organization at Black Lives Matter just torpedoed itself with its full fledged support of defund the police.

Bret 47:30
So yeah, it's it's jaw dropping, because that's it so defund the police right is obviously an ambiguous hashtag, but I would argue deliberately so and many people will tell you Oh, we really do mean completely defund the police and the police. I would say if you are advocating anything like ending the police without creating the society in which the police are no longer necessary, then Vance right, you are let's give you 1000 stupid points, right you're 1000 stupid if you think that's a good idea, right? Now let's take it one step farther. Not only do you believe that defunding the police completely in advance of fixing society is a good idea but you think that anybody who is skeptical of that idea is inherently racist. Okay, now are you 100,000 stupid if you believe that I mean it seems to me it's this is not how you don't really talk no it's not how I normally talk but this idea is so bad I mean as we are now discovering in the top jazz right yeah the top jazz now chapter three shootings one of them three now fatal Yes, it has three shootings I mean completely predictable This is

Heather 48:49
an a six square block declared nation state of its own that's why a week and a half old three shootings already

Bret 48:57
right three shootings already. And you know, we see a the people organizing this zone, having a freaking clue how things work. So there's one piece of video in which they're begging paramedics to come deal with one of the shooting victims, but there's another piece of video in which they're actually ushering the cops out and driving them off of the same incident. And you know, the fact is a you're not autonomous, you're not providing your own medical services and police services you're doing some other thing, then you're demanding services which yes, I do believe that somebody who's been shot deserves to have you know, they're still in Seattle, this zone is a fiction, but I don't expect the paramedics to go in the autonomy

Heather 49:41
of the zone is a fiction Yes, they are. Presumably they're not growing their own food. I mean, I understand there's probably gardens at the moment but yeah, you know, they're they're using city water. They're getting food from outside, they're getting medical services from outside, you know, the, the money that they made, they're not they're nowhere close to autonomous and you know, more power to a group that would actually try to do this, but they clearly have no idea what it actually takes and what number of systems they're relying on.

Bret 50:09
Right, what number of systems they're relying on. And of course, at the moment that you need the paramedics, there's not even a thought in their minds like, Oh, wait, we're autonomous, you know? Yes, like, well, we're going to drive the police out, you know, berate the paramedics for not coming in and not put two and two together. Yeah, right. That's perfectly absurd. And then we on the outside who exists in a world of linguistic traps, when in which we are all trying to assure everyone that we harbor you know, no wrong think are suffering from a totally insane presentation really depends what channel you listen to, if you're watching, you know, the sort of CNN half of the universe, you're getting a picture of the I can barely say chop with a straight face, given that it doesn't even linguistically add up. Yeah. occupied protests. Yeah, it's an occupation. And a protest. Maybe. But yeah, you don't occupy protests. But yeah, in any case, yeah. If you're paying attention to the sort of left leaning mainstream press or nominally left leaning mainstream press, you get this picture of, it's a festival. It's like a party. It's a barbecue. It's, you know, the next version of Burning Man. Yeah, all hunky dory. If you pay attention to the sort of left or the right leaning side, you get a completely opposite picture. It's like people are being shot. There's all kinds of skullduggery and fake downs and all of this.

Heather 51:35
And it's it's it's partisan hackery. It's partisan partisan hackery and here's actually, unless you were going through this, it'll just take a minute. Here's an example Zach, if you want to show this. This is from a few days of while back now, on June 12, Time magazine tweeted physicians have joined protests in cities across the country in an open letter signed by 1200 health professional says protest should not be shut down over fears of COVID-19 transmission. A day later, and 34 hours later, Time magazine tweets, hundreds of far right protesters defy COVID-19 restrictions to demonstrate in London. I'm sorry, but the Coronavirus doesn't care what your political ideology is. Yeah, this is this is partisan hackery and how is it that they expect to have anyone take them seriously, if they are going to put you know, this is this is from your head tip to read up on it for having put this together? You know, she's, as I understand conservative, you know, we don't share politics with her. But people across the aisle are seeing this nonsense and saying what the hell, who can we trust.

Bret 52:44
So I do want to get back to this. I don't know how much more time we have. But people are beginning to get it. Now it's not everybody. But people are beginning to get just how dangerous the situation we're in is. And I'm starting to get very interesting phone calls. in large measure around the Dark Horse duo proposal that I unleashed in full form, or nearly full form on the Joe Rogan podcast. And what is I think interesting is that a great many people are concluding that there just isn't any solution to the catastrophe that is unfolding short of something like that. So I would have expected it to be widely dismissed just on the basis that any novel electoral plan would be unlikely to work. But a great many people are just simply understanding that if we play any of the normal cards in the situation, we're effectively cooked because for one thing, this movement has understood correctly, just how much power it has. And it is structured to be infused into everything already. So it doesn't have to work to get there because it's already there ready to be activated. So you know, could the street part of the protest Calm down, of course, but it's not going to back off once it's realized that it has a mechanism to extract well being and transfer it to itself. So it's gonna keep going. And then there's the next part of the puzzle which is perfectly clear, which is that there are a great many people who have now been placed on notice that it is their well being that is going to be transferred to those in the movement. Those people have every right to be terrified. And that group tends to be right leaning, they tend to be armed. They tend to be rural, and those people have not yet weighed in so we are headed for a disaster. We're headed for a disaster in an election year. One of the things Tucker Carlson said on his program that really struck me was he made a plea. To vote for Republicans, right? And I thought, okay, standard stuff. And his plea was like, don't vote for them because they're all right. They're not. his point was it's the only choice. It's the only choice, because they are the only ones who oppose this thing. Right. Now, I don't believe that this is the right logic. But his point, you know, he could have given a rah rah speech about Republicans, it was very much the opposite. And in fact, he took the president very specifically to task for the president apparently said that why he The reason that he had not taken some aggressive action to halt the destruction of cities at the hands of the protest, was that actually for the moment, he's enjoying watching this occur, right? The President Trump's other Trump's that, the more Of course he did. And Tucker Carlson, of course, was like, that's deeply unpatriotic, you're the president of all of these people, you owe it to them. So here you've got somebody saying, the Republicans aren't up to the challenge. But what choice do we have because they're the only people who oppose this thing. The President is essentially derelict of duty or worse, on this front, this is a remarkable thing to be hearing on Fox News. It fits with where Tucker Carlson has been. He's one of the few voices who talks in an intelligent way about class warfare, right? He's been on this beat a long time. So

Heather 56:22
anyway, we're watching he understands the value of having an intact loyal opposition. Right. He he knows that the left needs to be intact and not entirely batshit. Crazy, or else the right will go insane in its own way. He seems

Bret 56:37
to he seems to which, you know,

Heather 56:41
I think I think I think he demonstrated respect for you and your and your, you know, strongly left leaning proclivities. When he had you on back during the Evergreen, Matt, he did, he was he was sort of tickled that you weren't, you know, Democratic Party hack.

Bret 56:57
Yeah, he was the Hillary supporter. Yeah. Yeah. And, you know, he is not a Bernie supporter, right. That was a Bernie supporter, and that was touching in some way. But

Heather 57:06
he thinks you're wrong. You think he's wrong, but like, but in terms of like, how, how can we go forward as patriots to make the country as as strong and resilient? And frankly, a country as anti fragile as possible? I think he's mostly got wrong ideas.

Bret 57:21
Yeah. So a he deserves his do a lot of people gave him a hard time over campus craziness. But the point is all the people who are calling us and saying, We blew it, you guys were right. This is every bit as dangerous, as you said. And it's now you know, taking over the country, if not the world. To the extent that he was letting people looking on college campuses, and saying, Hey, this is not a small matter, right? He was correct. But anyway, back to the original point, there is a great deal of concern that we have been left with no lever that correctly, either takes the energy of the protests and pointed in the direction of something productive and not massively dangerous. And so therefore, people are open to things that under ordinary circumstances, they're not open to that is to say, plays that are of an unusual sort. So the point of view of Dark Horse podcast, viewers and listeners, I would say, this is actually going to fall to you. The thing that makes it possible for us to do something unusual and to make it work is momentum, which will be generated grassroots. So if you're thinking Yes, it would be great. If something were to put us back on track, then the answer is you need to add energy to the system. And we need to start moving very quickly. We do not have a lot of time. So with

Heather 58:49
regard to moving very quickly, you're talking specifically about Darkhorse do this, right?

Bret 58:53
Yep. The Dark Horse duo plan. And the Dark Horse duo plan is carefully constructed to eliminate the usual objections to what would be called a third party. In this case, you've got two parties that have effectively abdicated responsibility for attempting to govern at the presidential level. And that opens the door to some alternative plan. And the Dark Horse duo plan is centrist in the sense that it would take somebody from the left and somebody from the right and get consensus from them. It is not inherently about centrist. In fact, I have no patience for centrists. The fact is the center is where we meet, right? Those of us who have a position on what ought to happen to meet in the center to discuss it. And this is that kind of plan. The idea is that at the moment, saving the Republic is the only priority that should be on our minds and that is that's the direction we have to go if we're to avoid an absolute calamity in the run up to this election. Okay, well, I I think we've reached a good pausing point. Yep, we are. We have a couple of announcements. And then we will be back for q&a in about 15 minutes

Heather 1:00:12
or so in, we've set up this what we're calling a dark horse membership at my Patreon. So either hiring Patreon, and we'll be doing a private q&a once a month. The first one will be the last Sunday of this month, this upcoming Sunday. There's a poll up there that I will probably I'll re up it for what time actually is preferred, but will be sometime middle of the day pacific time. So if you are interested in that, go to my Patreon and sign up at the $5 level if you want to have your questions prioritized as one as the answer $11 or up. You also have a Patreon Brett, and you do these private conversations with people once a month at higher, higher

Bret 1:00:55
net to two different conversations. One of them focused on evolutionary thinking the other focused on what to do about the breakdown of civilization.

Heather 1:01:05
And if you if you're enjoying this, share it, like it, subscribe to the channel. What else?

Bret 1:01:11
I think that's it. Oh, I

Heather 1:01:12
guess for those listening, who are only listening in the podcast, we do have a q&a that we don't put on the podcast after and you can ask questions in the Super Chat. If you were if you were listening, if you were watching YouTube during the first live stream, and we prioritize those based on money amount, and then for the second half of the q&a, we prioritize those on the basis of when they come in. So we try to get through as many as possible and never get through all of them. But that's that's how you can get questions to us for the second half.

Bret 1:01:41
If you're listening on audio, go check it out on YouTube, the q&a. Okay, we'll see you in about 15 minutes.

This transcript was generated by https://otter.ai