Bret 0:07
Hey, folks, welcome to the Dark Horse podcast live stream the 41st. If I am not mistaken, is that correct?

Heather 0:15
You are not mistaken,

Bret 0:16
I am not mistake. Well, that's good. That's an excellent way to start. So let me say a friend of ours, approached me recently and gently said, words to the effect of, even if we managed to save the Republic, if it comes at the cost of your sanity, it wasn't worth it. And I must say, on the one hand, I understand this meaning, and I appreciate what is being said to me that somehow the current events situation, and our political predicament is driving me a bit crazy. On the other hand, I would say my sanity would be a very small price to pay to save the Republic. And in any case, I would like to split the difference, and recognize that saving the Republic is very important, but that it is probably incumbent on me to figure out how not to go insane in the process.

Heather 1:10
I think that's fair. One of the things that we've been doing in service of that is spending some time on the water. When kayaking, we've just begun to try stand up paddleboarding. And we were hoping to spend today not talking about current events, talking about some, some other things having to do you know, related to what is going on in the world, of course, but not directly. Unfortunately, some things emerged, that we feel that we must begin begin with. So we do hope in one of the upcoming episodes to devote most or all of an episode to talking about schools, we've been hearing from a lot of people with either children in schools or who are teachers or staff at schools. And we're not going to do any of that today. But we are going to spend some time talking about what's happening on the streets, what's happening in Oregon, and then also get a little bit to some some ways that people might be dealing with depression and other mental health issues that are probably coming up for just about everyone at this point. And we're going to finish with a follow on to a question that we got asked in the last episode about about movies that we enjoy just to give people maybe some some things to go to that have nothing to do with the current moment that will allow for some smart, but other entertainment.

Bret 2:35
Well, I think this is a great plan for this episode for future episodes in order to depart further from current events. Actually, I think this is really more of a partnership with our audience that if they could do something to halt the progress of current events, then we would be able to focus on other matters. And failing, Failing that, I think if they just didn't tweet about it, and they could get everybody else not to if we don't know that current events are happening, we won't be talking about them. So

Heather 3:03
yeah, I actually don't get my news primarily from the tweets, but it's gonna have it's gonna take more than just not tweeting. Yeah, yeah,

Bret 3:09
it is. That was a joke, not a great one. Nonetheless, and in any case, yes, we will be attempting to intersperse as much other kinds of content as we can in upcoming episodes. So anyway, you look forward to that. All right. Now with that run up, so the current events

Heather 3:28
Yeah, so many people will have seen already but we are going to show a couple of these videos in which people who are calling themselves Black Lives Matter protesters are approaching and being antagonistic towards restaurant goers. So Zack, if you want to show the first video from Matt Walsh

Heather 4:23
and we have another one to show but before we move on, for those who were who are listening only and not watching, you see one particular young woman yelling at two restaurant guards. And what has happened I think before the recording started, is that the the mob has shown up and demanded of all of these people, most of them are eating outside, that they raise a fit and they raise a fist in solidarity. And we see other people everyone else that we can see who's seated at this restaurant has raised a fist and solidarity. I would again for those who don't Hurt me fists. Some of them will feel like they're in solidarity but this is this is the greengrocer This is the don't hurt me salute Vox love hobbles greengrocer. And you also see some of the protesters mobsters in the foreground at the end of the video not raising a fist but giving a finger to the to the couple, the young, straight white couple those last two descriptives of which shouldn't matter at all, who are refusing to do what the mob has demanded of them. So let's show this first this tweet Barry Weiss, we found this one through Barry Weiss sack. And then let's see if we can show the video that's embedded in there.

Heather 6:16
So very much the same kind of scene in this case it looks like it's just a woman maybe maybe she's sitting with someone we don't see them being assaulted by a group of people, including particular young man, a young white man who is just gets right up in her face very aggressive. Very, very, in any other situation. I would say that was clearly a sext interaction in which a dude is aggressively going after a woman who is sitting there and not having any of it she too is not raising a fist. So Barry after Barry Weiss after posting that video, which she she got from another source says also makes me wonder what makes particular people brave enough to stand up to a mob? Is it a rare personality? Is it strong conviction that overrides the fear. And she asks if we might have any insight. And before we start talking about that, I think this is a good time to bring up again, as I think we did in the last episode that famous Martin Mohler. And I need to look up his name to make sure I'm pronouncing it correctly, a quotation from the Oh about. And after World War Two, in which he says, first they came for the socialists, and I did not speak out because I was not a socialist. Then they came for the trade unionists, and I did not speak out because I was not a trade unionist. Then they came for the Jews, and I did not speak out because I was not a Jew. Then they came for me. And there was no one left to speak for me. And I tried to modify that exquisite and unfortunately, doesn't go out of fashion poem from him last time, and I didn't really nail it. And someone on YouTube who goes by Bobby fat, did what I think is a better job. So here's his contribution. First, they came for the socialists, and I helped them because I'm not a socialist. Then they came for the trade unionists, and I helped them because I'm not a trade unionist. Then they came for the Jews, and I help them because I am not a Jew, then they came for me, because they no longer needed my help. I think that nails it in a way.

Bret 8:35
Yeah, it's, let's put it this way you could do an exercise on how to rethink and modify this thing. And just simply going through that exercises is valuable from the point of view of understanding what the deep meaning is here. Because really, in some sense, you know, is it a poem? Is it a lesson in game theory? Is it a description of a historical process? You know, it's, it's all of these things.

Heather 9:03
As you know, there's other things that you mentioned, a description of game theory of historical, historical process, a description of historical process. Many certainly, those things aren't required in great poetry. But many of the great poems do exactly that. This is what this is, what the power of poetry is, what the power of music is, least music with lyrics that that they do. They sneak in without pretending not too important and universal truths without inherently being pointing to anyone in particular. And so they can, they can allow lessons to come into people's brains to percolate there without those people ever having to face perhaps their own hypocrisy, their own cowardice, their own failure to act in the past such that they might change the behavior going forward.

Bret 9:50
So I think they do one other thing, which I think is familiar to you and me from a teaching environment.

Heather 9:56
They've been good poems,

Bret 9:57
good poems, and I must say I you know, you meant musics music with lyrics. And I really think poetry is music devoid, devoid of melody, that really the idea is that the form is identical to a really powerful song. And the idea is that some, some lyrics are so powerful that you don't actually need melody to float them. And, you know, great music, great, lyrical music has both characteristics. It doesn't require you could read the lyrics and they would be meaningful. But they're augmented by the melody. But anyway, so

Heather 10:32
at another time, we should have, we should have more of this conversation, it would be terrific if we had it with your brother as well, because you and I have almost almost inverse responses to what the deepest part of music are, I think because of In my case, because of the by sort of origin story with music, or I, I played so much classical music from a young age that it was what I was immersed in, and I never, I didn't even hear music with lyrics until I was an early teenager such that the lyrical part of music seems like a totally separate thing to me.

Bret 11:04
Yeah, is a conversation worth having. And you know, I do find what happened to you. both beautiful and tragic, because you did pick up some really powerful thing that I wish I had, which is the ability to play an instrument, but it costs you in in terms of access to all that is so amazing in in lyrical music, and of course, you're, you're arriving there late. But anyway, what I wanted to say here about the videos of poetry is that the the thing about poetry is a if you write poetry, you find that you discover things about the subject matter that you're reading about that you didn't know, because you are forced to think in the neighborhood, it basically forces you to search what we evolutionist might call the adjacent possible, because linguistically, if the right word doesn't have the right number of syllables in it, or it doesn't rhyme, then you're forced to think about synonyms and then you're forced to go one step out, and then you're forced, you know, actually, Twitter has this aspect to it. Also, it forces you to think carefully enough to phrase something well, you know, in 280 characters, or whatever

Heather 12:13
it is, constraint is almost always a useful way to find your creative or analytical outlet,

Bret 12:19
which is why I said in the Greg Ellis podcast that I wasn't a fan of free verse, But of course, it really depends on the free verse, you can buy your constraint somewhere other than meter and rhyme and then it works just as well. But it totally free verse that expects nothing of the author is also not very informative. But in any case, the thing about the the poem, as you call it, that you read it first, you know, first they came for the socialists. The important thing is that it does not state its meaning, you infer its meaning by being led through a series of things, right? You don't even know what the thing is about until the end, the thing is about

Heather 12:58
this point we do. And so this is part of the reason for the value of new versions of this sort of thing all the time so that people can continue to be surprised to find that they've been led somewhere.

Bret 13:10
Right? And so you know, in this case, at the end, it's very frightening because to the extent that they came from me, but you know, what they come from me is right, that's depth. And the fact that there is no one to stand between you and it is frightening and the fact that you don't understand that you lost your opportunity to be defended at the point that you failed to defend. It's such an obvious point at one level and then we see the game theory fail again and again and again for you know, exactly the reasons that Barry is asking us if we have insight into but I wanted to go back to something about the video. Yes, you said that they were asked to raise a fist in solidarity.

Heather 13:49
I am. I am inferring that from comments and such I don't think I don't think I heard that in the video.

Bret 13:55
I think it is exactly the inference you were supposed to take and the thing is it is simultaneously true and a lot. Right

Heather 14:02
solidarity with it is true that that is presumably what they were asked to do. But is that actually the are those words actually reflective of what the gesture would mean is that is that the way in which it's a lie?

Bret 14:15
It's a lie in exactly the same way that asking people to kneel. Right we've seen many in the early parts of the protests and riots we saw officials being asked to kneel with the protesters kneeling is a you know did you kneel you know is this kneeling? As in the game of thrones you are showing failed t to something is this kneeling in solidarity. It's totally ambiguous. And so the point is, it is a physical Martin Bailey, where the gesture has both characteristics. Now if I raise a hand I'm gonna physical Martin Bailey is a physical mountain. If I raise a fist, right like this in solidarity with black lives matter. Have I announced that I believe that black lives are under threat Are you to and that we have to do something about it? Or have I just embraced black power, which is, of course, traditionally what that fist is. Now, I'm not even against the idea that a fist raised for Black Power is inherently an offensive thing. I get it. But the idea that you're going to have a cost people and force them to make a gesture, that very plausibly means that they are in favor of a black power movement, right, with no discussion that this

Heather 15:30
is and I guess I would say we can, it's even easier than that. I don't care what it is that a mob shows up at a restaurant asking me to do. I don't know if it's, if it's a, if it's demanding that I show support for a movement that I myself found it right. Why is it that anyone should feel responsible to or forced to do that thing, no matter how firmly, they are convinced that they are actually in favor of that thing? And so I mean, these really are two separate questions, right? This thing that they're asking you to do is not what it seems. And it's obscuring a whole lot of other things. And actually, you can tell that by the fact of how they're behaving right here, right now. Yeah. But also, even if you're sure that thing that you're being asked to show support for is something that you support, you should always be free to show or not show support for that thing on your own terms, under your own conditions on your own time. And, and so we have these few restaurant goers, resisting, even while everyone around them is sort of looking a little bit shamed and doing this thing, and how will, how will the people who resisted versus the guy sitting next to them who didn't resist feel how did they feel that night? How did they feel afterwards? The people who resisted were probably shaken. Yeah, still scared, worried? Could they be doxed? Could they be found, but they knew that they had resisted the thing that demanded of them something that was not okay. And the guy who avoided the mob for now, how, what does he do while sleep? Does he sleep? Well, I don't think so.

Bret 17:14
There's he and there's those off camera. And this is we have to we have to go Yes, yes. So I agree with your formulation. And I think it's exactly right. If If a group of well intentioned people confronted us at a cafe surrounded by people, maybe they came to us and they said, you know, so do you support unity? 2020, we'd say, of course, and then they start, you know, forcing other people to embrace it in the cafe, suddenly, I'm not even on board with the support part. The point is, I don't support it if it's forced in any way. And All right, so let's get to the I think it's really in part, the issue that Barry is asking us to comment on, which is, what happened, the people on camera, those who put up their fist and those who resisted. That's one category. And we because of our evolutionary processing, focus on that, because they are the people in the narrative. But this narrative is really not even about them. Right? The person who sees that video, which is Who knows, hundreds of 1000s of times as many people as we're actually present, maybe millions, depending upon how far those videos go. That's the target. And I will point out, this is the exact analog of the Evergreen situation, right? The protesters flooded in cameras out, right? The idea is, whatever you do is about to be broadcast. Who do you want to be? Right? Now? Let's compare these two on the screen. You've got the people who raised their fist did what they were told, irrespective of what they actually felt, right? They paid one price, maybe they weren't comfortable being told to raise their fist, and they felt weak for doing so on the other hand, there's no focus on them. Right? They are unlikely to show up anywhere. On the other hand,

Heather 19:17
they may walk away Sorry, I know you're going somewhere, but they may walk away. Actually, some of them may walk away feeling better about the movement, because they have now shown support and it will be harder for them to walk away. And some of them and unfortunately, I think it will be a minority will walk away feeling worse about the movement now questioning it in a way that they perhaps had not done before. And wonder if it can do that to people who had nothing to do with whom they had no beef. What else might it do? And they might, they might actually begin to question the movement. I suspect though that that will be a minority of those who without thinking about it and without ever imagine that they would resist didn't resist and did raise a fist on support.

Bret 19:59
Well, I will Again, evergreen teaches us everything we need to know, there was a faculty colleague of ours, somebody who at one point would have called a friend who was cornered during the protests at evergreen, and was frightened by it and wrote about it. And then flipped sides because she was offered power in exchange for embracing the thing, which is, of course, the underlying dynamic here. But oh, yeah, all right. If we, if we go back to this, these cafes, right. If you don't raise a fist in that circumstance, then you are very likely you have reason to expect that video of you not raising a fist is going to be broadcast. So whether or not you are doxxed, is in some sense, not it because the, the price to be paid for raising a fist is probably a price between you and who you were sitting with. Because there you know, that's the person you have to look in the eye after the thing, the person who didn't raise a fist, whatever their reason for not doing so may have been and it may have been as good as the one you spell out. Maybe the point is, hey, you're not going to tell me when I raise a fist. And when I don't, I will decide that

Heather 21:10
this is in no way a statement about your movement rise is a statement about you not being able to tell me what I do, right

Bret 21:16
is a statement about us being equals, right? It's a statement about maybe I'm an ally, but I'm an ally by virtue of the real meaning of that term, which is a pure relationship, not a subordinate relationship. And so in this case, solidarity, which sounds like a peer relationship, actually subordination. But in any case, think about the asymmetry of the game theory. You're one of the anonymous people who raised their hands, it doesn't get very far, maybe nobody even spots that you were present. Right? You're the person who doesn't raise your hand, suddenly your phrase, a phrase of fist, you're, you're suddenly famous for this, right? In some sense, right? You are now on the minds of all of the people who think it's cool to go to cafes and force people to raise a fist, right? You're, you're on their feet is one of the resistors. And you're also broadcast everywhere else. And so this is the answer to your question, Barry, is that the game theory plays out in the mind in that moment, with the What do I do to reduce the cost of this thing? Maybe I don't want to empower this movement. I don't want to become its iconic resistor. I don't want this to dominate my life going forward. The point is the bargain is you do whatever minimizes the chance that the camera lands on you.

Heather 22:33
But you're answering the inverse question that she asked. Well, she's asking what makes particular people brave enough to stand up to a mob. So you are you are explaining, and this also warrants, explanation, warrants, both the question being asked, and it being answered, what explains the vast majority of people? And I've seen numbers in the range of like, 98 99% of people who will, who will raise the fist? And you know, we have that that is the answer you're providing right now. But really, what we need is to provide people not just sort of a litany of you might have these characteristics, in which case, you might be more likely to resist such demand should a mob come for you. But also, what is it that you can be thinking of in the moment that will allow you to have the courage and the moment to resist?

Bret 23:18
Alright, but this is where this gets so complicated. I agree with you that the question I answered is the inverse of the question she asked. But it also I think, contains the indicator of the question of the answer to the question. So I did ask. Unfortunately, this is personal, it'd be much better if I wasn't the guy in those evergreen videos, the thing that people need to understand and I keep saying, and I think people don't quite get what I'm saying. Why did I do what I did, confronted with students armed with cameras portraying me as a racist who wanted me to simply embrace their movement publicly so that they would go and harass someone else. There was never a choice. It never occurred to me literally did not occur to me that that was an option on the table. Still doesn't. I still, I know formally, it's an option on the table. But I do not register it as one because something about my development produced a program in which that's just not an option on the table, right? It's like a keyboard without an accent on it. Right? There may be some keystroke you could use to get there but it's not on the keyboard,

Heather 24:32
but help everyone else out here. Like how do other people without that very particular and, you know, perhaps unique in the world, trade that doesn't even register going along as an option even for a moment. How do the rest of us not only dismissed that as an option in the moment, but really just relegate it to another world

Bret 24:55
so I'm not ruling it out. What I'm saying is The thing that you're looking for is the answer whatever it was the developmentally produced in it's not it's not just me, it's lots of people, but it's rare.

Heather 25:10
I've never heard anyone else describe exactly what you're saying, because you know, there are there are there are many of us who will stand up to these things. Yeah, the way that you describe this is so absolute. And that kind of absolute, like, actually, you don't have to worry in the moment about what choice you will make. Because actually, there is no choice is a kind of framing that might be useful for some people who might otherwise find themselves unsure how it is that they need to act in the moment.

Bret 25:41
So there is development, and then there are hacks that substitute for development. And I think the question that people are really asking, and I do get asked this a fair amount. I think the thing that people they don't know, when I was teaching, I always used to say to students, please answer the question I should have asked you rather than the one I did ask you, because very often students will answer the question you did ask when the right question is right next door, and you'll discover it a week later. And so I'm going to answer the question that people should ask, which is how do I bootstrap the developmental structure to get there? Because I know my logical mind knows that that's who I want to be?

Heather 26:21
How do I override the amygdala in the moment and do the right thing, right.

Bret 26:26
And I would argue that this is actually a this is something, I don't know how they do it in the military. But the military manages to take people and reschedule their system of incentives so that they are capable of effectively being ordered to engage in heroism or something like this. And I'm not arguing that that's the right structure. But my point is,

Heather 26:50
unfortunately, there's also a certain degree of depersonalization and n such that is not what we would be, would want to be seen as advocates wise,

Bret 26:57
it's why it's not the right answer in this case, but what it is, is a proof of concept that there is an answer to this question that can be systematized. Now I'm not arguing for a systemic answer. And in fact, the poem that you read about first that came from the socialists, first they came for the socialists is a, it is a hack to the extent that you have that thing resident in your mind, some part of you actually knows that thing. So the question is, does that thing arise in your mind at the point that they, you know, come for you.

Heather 27:31
So that mean, that is that is one of the things that poetry is for, right? That that because because it's inverse, it's easier to call up, it's easier to have remembered in the first place, and it is more likely to come up into your mind at the point that a mob shows up,

Bret 27:45
right. And the other thing is an analogue. I've argued in a couple places, I think it did an early video on wisdom. And I argued something that then after I released my video, it turns out, a lot of people have made an argument similar to this in various different places. But the argument is, that wisdom is either very tightly related with or synonymous with delayed gratification, that the idea is, we are all as children, unable to regulate our desire to have that thing. And that there are many things that in order to have the thing you really want, you have to be able to forego some superficial substitute for it in the short term,

Heather 28:26
I think, I think the marshmallow test somehow got got revealed as not being what it was claiming to be, but but it still looms large for me as an example of this gotten so noisy out there.

Bret 28:41
So yes, it whether or not the marshmallow test is or is not valid, like the Stanford Prison Experiment may or may not be valid, it resonates because we all know that there's something to this and we all watch children unable to regulate their desire for that thing, and for going something much better. And so the adults we respect are almost always people who have figured out how to put off some instant gratification for a delayed gratification. And the farther you can delay that gratification, the more powerful this process is. And frankly, the thing that's really hard to grasp is that our society has caused us to become very deeply focused on self as individual, and this is understandable. But as important as self is self is also part of something right? How important is yourself if the things that you do to keep yourself you know, we're watching people of means fleeing major cities, even as they are politically paralyzed from doing anything interesting, right, they're saving themselves and they are not taking any risk on behalf of the larger entity on which we all depend. That is going to result sooner or later in that entity failing. And we're actually you know, when you're watching Americans confronting other Americans in cafes and portraying them as racist or otherwise defective for not being willing to comply with an order. You're watching the failure of the US. And so the point is registering the value of that which is lost if you act in the moment in the way that you are being incentivized to act is the key. Can you do?

Heather 30:30
No, no, I got it. I gotta push backwards. It's far too analytical. Like there's no way that it works at that level, in part because you know, what you're saying is your your people are thinking too much about themselves and not enough about something bigger? And I would argue it's actually exactly the opposite. That people that this, you know, what, what is it that some people have that allows them to stand up to a mob? Well, having this character trait of being ash negative, which is something that your brother's talked about, and we have talked about before, right, like, of not conforming to expectations of the people around you when they are patently lying, right. And so that's what the Asch experiment from the 50s revealed, and later, repeats have been hundreds, I think of replications of that. And that was originally just male undergraduates. And it's been done now in you know, across a number of people. And one of the things we find, for instance, is that women are more likely to fall prey to to the Asch conformity, conformity of, of peer pressure, basically, even when these peers who are new to them, and they will probably never see again, and they are patently telling a falsehood about what it is they see before them. Women are more likely than men to to conform. And that doesn't mean that all women conform, and no men conform. Nor does it mean that you can't change yourself, but sort of recognizing conformity to peer pressure to social pressure as something that you're engaging in, in the moment when the mob is there. And saying, you know, what, no, who am I? You know, who am I, when I go back, and try to sleep tonight, and report out to my spouse, or my God, or my children or my friends, whatever it is, Will I be proud to look them in the eye and say, This is what I did? Or Well, I look at the ground, the way the guy sitting next to the resistors is with his fist in the air, knowing that he does not want to look at the camera.

Bret 32:28
But I don't understand, I understand everything you just said. And of course I resonate with it. What I don't understand is where the disagreement is, because I feel like we're talking about the same thing. I think

Heather 32:37
in the moment, it's, it's so easy, it's too easy to be be in that room, I mean, so this is this is maybe maybe the framing is that as you have said many times elsewhere, the room is not the room, right? The room is in fact the the internet where this thing is getting going to get get played out. But in the moment in the room are understandable millions of years of human and in pre human evolution, cause us to look around and try to fit to some degree, especially if some are threatening violence against us. How do you just get out of this situation right now, you are asking for people to imagine maybe a bigger us a, a bigger group that will be better served by resistance. But that requires staying in the group think and, and, and sort of moving through the emotion into a purely analytical, purely abstract space, that also doesn't refer back to who you are at your core identity. And I think, you know, I think that those two sort of extremes of who you are as an individual and who we are proud to be who you want to aspire to be and how successful Are you being at becoming that best of all possible use? And how is it that society can be best for all people, that those are the two things that that we would, we would try to maximize. And that intermediate social group is the one that is most likely to get you to behave badly. And I just I think that in the moment, referring back to yourself and your individual self and whether or not you're going to be able to sort of live with yourself is going to be much more likely to succeed than imagining the greater abstraction,

Bret 34:34
okay, now I know why we're disagreeing. Okay. Let's imagine three states. There's self, which is local in space and time to me. There's future self, which is local to me, but not in time. That is to say, How am I going to feel an hour after this interaction? How am I going to feel a year after this interaction, and then there's self but bigger That is to say I'm part of something that I'm actually dependent And so on. And ultimately, if that thing fails, the cost to me is absolute. Right? I think all I think all these things are the same. They result in the same alteration of, of the thought process in the moment. And I would just point out, and let's take the Evergreen situation because it was simple. And because we know the context of it, right? I didn't have a choice, I wouldn't have had a choice if I had been alone. But I was also there in front of my students, right? For me to have a choice in that moment would have left me completely hypocritical with respect to everything I had represented to them as true that w made it no choice. My, you

Heather 35:49
had already publicly defined yourself as who you were on the inside, and therefore to cave to the mob would have been a public act of hypocrisy, which won't be true for most people. And so maybe one of the things you're arguing is, in advance of it is such mob coming for you begin to make public in small ways who you know yourself to be, so that you have to answer to the self that you've already established yourself to be.

Bret 36:15
I believe this is exactly correct. And the reason people don't do it in general, is that they will begin to lose friends. And this goes to hearing from many of them, this goes to something you and I have said on multiple occasions, which is that one thing that was crystal clear about the Evergreen situation was that it revealed everybody's character. Now, the fact is the people that I might have thought were our friends who turned on us, I would rather not have had them as acquaintances, in the run up to the thing, because what they were was unreliable. And what you need is friends who are reliable, so better to know, it's better to know as early as possible. And so to the extent that you see the sad, but it's better to know, the only thing I find sad about it is their failure of character. Right? The fact that that weakness is so widespread is sad, I don't find it personally sad. I'm,

Heather 37:13
I'm more in the narrative that I thought was true.

Bret 37:17
I agree. And I'm stunned by some of the things we saw. But I would say the other side of that is not well, you're gonna lose friends, it's you're going to discover who you can trust who you could find yourself in a foxhole with and be glad that they were the ones there. And so faculty almost universally disappointed us. They didn't all turn on us, right? Many of the people that we were friends with were silent, which is frustrating, or privately supported, or privately supported. But they did not attack us there were attacks from a number of different people. But the number of people, especially on the student side who shined right was more than compensation for all of the people who were weak. And so I think I think you're right, that the way, the hack that is useful, is to explore this ahead of time, such that the structure that is there at the point that you are confronted with that camera knows why you did what you did. So two other things, I think we should say is one, I don't see any reason to imagine that the people who didn't raise their fist had the slightest bit of racism to them. But even if they did, the point is this is not how we interact with each other. Right? It is one thing to disagree with people. And it's another thing to weaponize stigma in order to control them. That is completely unacceptable. It is obviously a threat that's being leveled in public and we all have an absolute obligation to resist. It's being wielded, right, no good will come up with us. And it certainly will not be good for black lives or any any other group of Americans.

Heather 39:03
That's right. You said you had two things. Was that both?

Bret 39:05
No. Trying to remember the second thing was I it'll come to me in a second. All right.

Heather 39:13
Well, in the meantime, let's talk about Ted Wheeler showing Oh, sure. Oh, good. Zack, would you show the tweet from Ted Wheeler that I sent to you? He says the Oregon cares fund is now accepting applications. Black Families and business owners experiencing housing insecurity emergency needs or loss in revenue due to covid 19 pandemic are eligible for cash grants. This is the mayor of Portland, announcing the Oregon cares fund. Zach, did I send you the link can you show the Oregon cares fund URL that he is linking to and as it says here on the screen for those of you just listening, the Oregon cares fund is a targeted investment in the black community from the cares act Coronavirus Relief Fund. It is for black people, black owned businesses and black community based organizations. So this is how some of the Federal relief from covid 19 pandemic and lockdowns are being used in the state of Oregon. So if you would click on facts, the frequently asked questions and scroll down to how do the Oregon cares fund come to exist? It's always it's always down there it is. In addition to federal funds directed to many US citizens and businesses in July, the Oregon legislature voted to allocate $200 million from the federally funded cares act Coronavirus Relief Fund towards specific communities and sectors of the economy. So the legislature dedicated 62 million of that 200 million towards quote specific communities and sectors of the economy. What were the other ones $50 million to cultural institutions 35 million to emergency relief checks for those waiting on unemployment benefits to be paid 30 million to pay workers who need to quarantine and 25 point 6 million in grants to small businesses. None of those other quote unquote specific communities and sectors of the economy are demographically marked. They are they are potentially specific sectors of the economy or, or groups that can be identified by for instance, workers who need the quarantine. But none of the others are demographically or in this particular case racially described. and elsewhere on these on these sites, you will find the claim. And I'm just going to start pointing out when things that are stated as facts are, in fact claims and not necessarily facts, especially when they come with no references whatsoever. And of course, often the references are lies anyway. But the claims without even citations are made on these websites, the Oregon cares fund website, I believe, and on some of the links that they have to the organizations that are helping them administer these funds, that there are no there are two. There are two pandemics that are facing us. There's COVID-19, and there's systemic racism and that black people are suffering worse because of both of them. And of course, to the degree that systemic racism is a is an ongoing problem. Black people are of course, yes, one of the groups of people who are facing that worse, but the idea that black people are experiencing the effects of COVID-19 at a rate that is really in any way greater than all the rest of people but to the tune of $62 million to black people, black owned businesses, who are experienced black people who were experiencing housing insecurity, loss in revenue due to COVID-19. When no other demographic gets anything to that effect is amazing. This is a direct manifestation of Candy's anti racism. We've talked in the last couple of episodes about ibram x Kendi. And his racism versus anti racism formulation, which is, which is a rhetorical trick, he is trapping all of us with this is either trapped or successfully gotten jack Dorsey to put up a don't hurt me 10 to $10 million towards his initiative at Boston University. What's this going to create? What is this kind of, quote unquote, anti racism going to create resentment and actual racism? Yes, I mean, it is a kind of racism, but it's going to also create the kind of actual racism that that this whole movement is pretending to be fighting against.

Bret 43:48
It is, as I've argued, the ultimate objective is reparations in every interaction at every scale, every day of every week, every context, that's what this is. The amazing thing about it is that think about how our system is supposed to be governed, right? Our system is supposed to be governed by a process in which that which serves the interests of the public becomes policy. How does that happen? primarily through the election of representatives who understand our interests and manifest them in a policy context. The motivation for this distortion of the distribution of federal funds, these are federal funds. The motivation for it is the result of the protests and riots stemming from the George Floyd death. I won't even say killing because frankly, I think that that is something we don't yet know that it was. We can we can establish that in a court but at some level. This is the result of Violence in the streets that are demanding that are insisting on a particular narrative. And they are demanding changes. And the policy apparatus is manifesting those changes without taking the temperature of

Heather 45:16
the public. This is Ted Wheeler putting up a fist in solidarity, right? This is Ted

Bret 45:20
Wheeler putting up a fist in solidarity. And what is fist in solidarity means it means exactly what we saw in that cafe. Yes, it means that somebody is solving their local problem, as jack Dorsey did.

Heather 45:33
Had Wheeler is Yeah, as Governor Brown is.

Bret 45:36
So it is the hijack of governance, it is the hijack of the manifestation of the apparatus that is supposed to be serving us all. Frankly, it's not clear to me that this is in any way legal, right, that you can even distribute funds to people based on race in this way. Also, I'm like, I'm sorry. Also, I would point out that this is absolutely 100% going to force the reinvention of the one drop rule,

Heather 46:06
right? Lots of people want to be black. What does

Bret 46:09
black owned mean? Right? Does it mean? I mean, there's no workable definition that isn't going to evolve, involve, effectively some claim? Let the games begin. Yeah, let the games begin. So

Heather 46:22
so let's just briefly go back over the other four categories, that this $200 million, that the boy don't have it on screen anymore. $200 million at the Oregon legislature, I guess decided to put towards specific communities and sectors of the economy, cultural institutions, which presumably means things like museums, and zoos, and theater organizations, live live art, and such. Emergency Relief checks for those waiting on unemployment benefits to be paid, which, for those not in Oregon, Oregon famously has done a terrible job of getting unemployment money to people in a timely fashion. So this is a fix for a failure that's within the state of Oregon itself. I presume that there are some other states that are doing really badly, but you know, we have friends on the Vancouver side of the border, that's Vancouver, Washington, and friends in Portland, Oregon, both of whom have been trying to get benefits. And on the Washington side, it's been easy. And then the Oregon side, it's not 30 million. It doesn't matter if the amounts cultural institutions, basically, emergency relief checks for people who are eligible for unemployment, but the state system is failing them so far, paying workers who need to quarantine obviously, and grants to small businesses. Okay, all of those, I can totally get behind all of those grips. And then let's see what this Oregon cares fund does only for black Families and business owners who are experiencing housing insecurity, emergency needs or loss of revenue due to covid 19 pandemic, okay, let's instead of making this a racially biased set of grants, put more money to grants to small businesses, and put the rest of that money that that 62 million towards helping with housing and security and emergency needs for all Oregonians who need it and who apply and yes, that will mean that some less money goes to black Oregonians but it is distributed across the board. Maybe I'm done. I know this makes me so. so angry. Yeah. And God, why am I still surprised?

Bret 48:36
Right? This is this is coming from the same administration that has coddled. These rioters, which is now apparently resulting predictably enough in businesses fleeing from downtown. I mean, what else are they going to do?

Heather 48:51
businesses who were on the cusp of failing anyway because of lockdowns, we were just beginning to open up here in Portland, which we know better than the rest of the state. just beginning to open up. The protests began. The riots began the very next second. And restaurants are closing retail shops are closing. Of course they are

Bret 49:08
they are and I should point out I displeases me to even have to say this, but evidence emerged in the last week of protesters, hurling feces. This is incredible, right? It seems to me like at least that the rule of thumb, the people who are hurling bodily fluids and feces are wrong, right? I'd like somebody to provide a credible example of where that's not the case. I would say it's quadrupling the case in the midst of a pandemic. Yeah, right. So at some level, we've got anarchists who existed in Portland before the George Floyd protests were regularly engaging in protests in the street. have taken up with the BLM protests and riots and are now engaging in this vile behavior. And yet that that manifestation is resulting in large numbers of funds being redirected. It's just it's appalling.

Heather 50:19
Okay, let's let's pivot. Can we please? All right. I want to talk a little bit about some, some of this is new research, and some of it is not. But the entire country and I suspect the world is suffering a mental health crisis at this point, from a combination of lockdowns that have gone on forever, it seems and look like there's no end in sight. In combination now with the protests and the riots that for many people is something they only see on screens have no direct access to, in combination with the United States, the presidential election. And you know, if you're in California, maybe your house is gonna burn down, I mean, my God, just one thing after another. So we, for those who are well familiar with our kind of thinking, or evolutionary thinking, it will probably come as little surprise to you that we are suspicious of, of treatments for human conditions that look like quick fixes, and tend to come in the form of pills. Not to say that some pharmaceuticals aren't a very effective treatment for some conditions some of the time. But we feel and we are not certainly alone in this, that the use of pharmaceuticals to treat especially things having to do with mental health and mood disorders and anxiety and depression and such as been way overplayed. So to that there's a article from 2008 Turner at all 2008 called selective publication of antidepressant trials and its influence on apparent efficacy is that you could show I do I send that to you, Turner at all. 2008? I think I did. And in it, this is a review of research registered with the FDA on 12, anti depressant agents across are you finding it, Zach? Oh, yeah. Yeah. So this is a review. This is Turner at all 2008. It's a review of research that was registered with the FDA. So not research done by the FDA or inherently funded by the FDA, but it was just registered with federal drug and miss the Food and Drug Administration and the United States on 12. So called anti depressant agents, which just means 12 molecules that are understood to sometimes work against depression, Neo selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, like Prozac being probably one of them. Across over 12,000 patients, across many, many different research studies its review article, they found this group of researchers that 31% of the research is not published, even though it was registered with the FDA. And furthermore, the research that wasn't published is significantly more likely to show a negative result, meaning that the drug in question was not effective in treating depression than the published research. So this is misleading and could easily lead to over prescription and reliance on pharmaceutical solutions for depression. Let's just hope so Zack, if you want to scroll to the results, I'm going to try to see if I can see it on my screen here.

Heather 53:42
fortunate. Here we go. So they say when we look, according to the published literature, it appeared that 94% of the trials conducted were positive, which means if you look just at the the scientific literature, 94% of trials on these 12 antidepressant agents appeared to be effective in treating depression. But when you look at all of the studies that were registered with the FDA, including the ones that weren't published, actually, you find that only 51% of them were positive. So I bring this up, just to suggest once again, that maybe drugs aren't your best new pharmaceuticals are not your best friend for treating depression. And saying, well, we found you know, there's evidence in the scientific literature that things are effective Well, that does not reveal the likely bias in in publication. In fact, the conclusions here are, are careful. They say we can't tell from this. If this is a result. The bias results from a failure to submit manuscripts. From decisions by journal editors and reviewers not to publish Or both. So they're not saying anything about where the bias may be coming from. But just that there is a clear bias that the published literature makes it look like these, these drugs to treat depression are far more effective than they are. So if if drugs are not the best thing to be dealing with what is likely to be a creeping mental health tragedy across many populations at this point, what might be so we've got to you must say something, oh,

Bret 55:29
my God, so many things that need to be said in response to those Okay, one, that's 2008. Right? That is long before the, the so called replication crisis, right? Okay. Yep, 250 percent of the papers, if you take the aggregate of the positive and negative results, we're not positive. Okay? That's after a perverse incentive, because there's a perverse incentive to do work that will come out with a positive and therefore publishable result. So we can't test Oh,

Heather 56:02
there's already selection on these drugs. And on this research, right now,

Bret 56:06
we have a gargantuan apparatus with tremendous financial resources that has an interest in having results published that justify releasing these drugs into the market, it has captured the agency that is supposed to regulate their safety, even after this 50%.

Heather 56:24
Well, so just like the FDA is not implicated here. the only the only thing the FDA is doing here is that the researchers doing this review paper went and just looked at the papers that were registered with the FDA. Right?

Bret 56:34
I got that. But what I'm seeing more broad, every step of this process is biased in the same direction. Yes, right. Every step of the process is biased in the same direction. And there's still enough evidence to find that only 50% of the results are positive right? Now, at the same time, this is you know, so alright. It's very ambiguous that these drugs are a good thing, if only half the studies say that they work at all right? That leaves out two really important factors. One is, does the fact that a drug has a positive effect in the short term mean that it's a good drug?

Heather 57:10
It's like the only thing you track with COVID-19? Is deaths, right? It's the same thing.

Bret 57:15
Exactly.

Heather 57:15
What about all of the other lingering effects that may actually cause a decrease in quality of life or early death that we aren't tracking? Well, what about all the side effects of the drugs? What about all the other systems that they affect? What about all the other drugs you have to be on to deal with the side effects of the drugs, right?

Bret 57:30
So there is massive downside, much of which will not be measured much of which is actually unknowable, because if it manifests after decades, it won't have been captured in these initial studies that said, these drugs were a good thing can't say

Heather 57:43
it was because of that drug, right. And then

Bret 57:45
there's the overarching elephant in the room here, which is, we know Dec about the brain, okay, we really don't know how it works. We know a fair amount about what it does phenomenologically. But in terms of our interventions, our interventions are all crude as hell, because a brains are tremendously different between people. And B, because we don't have control at the level of these systems. So the fact that you're going to dump some chemical into somebody's system, and it's going to have some alteration that, under the best of circumstances makes them feel better in the context of this drug, may well make them feel worse, when you remove the drug later, may interfere with all kinds of other things that make them happy. And so the positive effect of the drug is then canceled by some other effect in their life. Right?

Heather 58:32
All no hypothesis should absolutely be that if you dump a bunch of neurotransmitter into someone system, that it's going to have long term effect, right,

Bret 58:40
it's going to have long term effects. And so in any case, the idea that we take this as a sophisticated approach, that what we're looking for is the best molecule to dump on the person system rather than looking for a deeper cause. That we do this to children. Right, who then end up in this damned if you do damned if you don't situation later on where their development has happened in the context of this drug that then becomes necessary, because developmentally It was a feature of their environment. This is so insane as an approach. And anyway, I know, I know, we're headed to interventions that aren't pharmaceutical in nature. And that's a really important thing, but it's so much more we give it credit for

Heather 59:20
we could we could do two times a week live streams just talking about pharmaceuticals, and why why you should not go there. First, when you have a problem and could should be seeking other forms of relief for whatever symptoms you're experiencing.

Bret 59:37
I think we could go one live stream a week just blowing off steam ranting.

Heather 59:41
I think we already do that. Okay.

Bret 59:42
All right. Well, good point. All right. So we were going to talk about alternatives to What's that,

Heather 59:49
Zach? All right. Well, I think it's obvious that now we need to talk about zebrafish. Of course, I couldn't find a way to talk about lizards, which is usually my preference, but it's going to be zebra. Our

Bret 1:00:00
longtime listeners know that zebrafish are the next topic of discussion as a result of the way we've set this up,

Heather 1:00:07
I hope that some people took bets and made a little money on that, that you're guessing that zebrafish were coming up next. Seriously, though, zebrafish are a model organism. And I think this, just that statement needs a little bit of explaining before we, we will explain why I will explain why I'm talking about zebrafish here in a moment.

Bret 1:00:28
Can I say that when you say they are model organisms, you do not mean, like, he's a model prisoner, you mean something entirely different?

Heather 1:00:36
I do. In fact, Zach, actually, if you want to show my screen just for a moment, this is actually a really a lovely paper that I just ran across today. And I've only, I've only skimmed it. But for those latent or nascent biologists, who wants to know more about model organisms, this actually does sort of an interesting job of describing so the idea is that, if we, you know, most of this is in service of human health, and, and, and medicine, you know, how how many organisms are there out there, that we could learn about that would be relevant, something that we could learn about them would be relevant to something that we could learn about humans, obviously, hundreds of 1000s I just, I pulled that order of magnitude out of a hat. But you know, certainly many, many, many more than we could possibly learn everything about them. And so what has happened in in biology is that a few organisms have been chosen as ones that some, some people are just going to learn a tremendous amount about from the, from the genomics, to the behavior to the immune physiology to the cellular, molecular biology, the development, you know, across the board, I'm sure I'm forgetting whole, the whole swaths of biology here, but so you have C. elegans, you have a rabid opsis you have Drosophila melanogaster, you have

Bret 1:02:01
well, mus musculus, musculus

Heather 1:02:03
and, and many more than that, all of which have proven themselves to be we know enough about that. Now, depending on what question you might be asking, you can tweak some aspects of what they are, and, and have effectively controlled for a number of things you would have a hard time doing if you just went out into nature and picked an organism at random.

Bret 1:02:23
So let me just say, there's a lot of logic behind this, one of the pieces of logic has to do with the trade off between knowing something in you know, you can imagine that there are creatures in which some system would be best studied. And then there's the advantage that comes from knowing some creature very well at multiple levels. But one of the downsides of knowing some creature very well at multiple levels, is that to the extent that that creature is not representative, you may be misled in terms of understanding how to extrapolate to the thing we most typically care about, which is humans.

Heather 1:02:57
And you may become more likely to decide that outliers are not relevant, because they don't fit a pattern that you've already begun to see. And frankly, once you start throwing out outliers, you start being a verification test, you start enforcing the idea that your model will conform to the model that your future results will conform to the model that you already had, as opposed to you actually testing a hypothesis. So this this is yet another problem with model organisms that said, they have they have their place and zebrafish is is one. Okay, so zebrafish is another one on the list of model organisms that I just gave. And I've got this this paper that finds actually, Zack, you could show I think I gave you the link for olivary at all 2020. The title of which is zebrafish show long term behavioral impairments, resulting from developmental vitamin D deficiency published, well to be published, actually, October of this year, it's online now already. This is not a preprint. This is just an early online publication of of a peer reviewed primary literature in the journal physiology and behavior. And the the paper Sorry, sorry, I'm trying to go back and forth and see what it has to say the highlights of this paper are that when it's when, when juvenile zebrafish are given diets that are either replete with or deficient in vitamin D, those zebrafish that were as youngsters given insufficient vitamin D in their diets had more anxiety, behavior, anxiety, like behavior as adults. Furthermore, they swim less and their startle response was increased. So again, these are just those are the highlights for the paper and there's a lot more in there but juvenile zebrafish that were deficient in vitamin D, as adults had more anxiety. They had less than lower activity in the form of swimming because they're fish. And that's what they do, and, and tended to startle more than those who had sufficient amounts of vitamin D. And so, you know, we went through like, well, what, why? What does it mean for it to be a model organism. But you also need to know a little bit about the natural history, actually of zebrafish to know why they should matter because zebrafish are cave dwellers, right? That never get exposure to the sun, and therefore don't synthesize vitamin D The way we do, then maybe the idea of taking it out of their their diet is ridiculous, because you would never find zebrafish without vitamin D. In the wild, because they are not synthesizing it from the sun anyway. Well, it turns out, zebrafish are Helios, which is Raven fish, which are vertebrates, unlike us, you know, share an evolution of the brain, the central nervous system and have a majority of shared neurotransmitters and molecular mechanisms of physiology. So that's, that's true, we can we know that just from what, where they fit on the phylogenetic tree. But they're also basically living in shallow stream shallow, clear streams, where presumably there is access to a lot of sun. So what I take from this, and this is just one of two things that I want to talk about briefly here, as you know, Are you beginning to suffer from anxiety and depression like symptoms, rather than running to your doctor for SSRIs? or similar? anti depressant agents considered going out in the sun, and not slathering yourself with sunscreen from head to toe before you do? So? This is yes, a result from zebrafish. And yes, it's a result. And this I think may help explain further some of what's going on with a whole generation of young people whose parents slathered them with sunscreen before they were ever allowed to go outside. But children and adults alike benefit from having their skin exposed to the sun. And this is just another result that suggests that actually, it may help with mood as well.

Bret 1:07:04
Yeah. If I read that I only skimmed the paper but if I read it correctly, also, increased vitamin D results in greater job satisfaction among zebrafish.

Heather 1:07:14
Yes, absolutely. Yeah. Especially the zebrafish who find themselves working in cubicles. Oh, man, if during their 10 minute breaks that they're allowed to take each day they go out into the sun, and leave their cubicles they are they're much happier.

Bret 1:07:27
I can imagine they would have ever went to the corners of a cubicle or just not well suited to the

Heather 1:07:32
No, they do not have the deep body form of say refresh. So they don't turn very well. They don't have great agility. They kind of built for speed. Yeah,

Bret 1:07:39
yeah. Speed, you're the first person to ever say that a medzi. Refresh, but

Heather 1:07:43
okay. On a later episode of the evolutionary lens, we will talk about the deep body form and refresh, probably we won't, but we could. We should. Okay, we should, we should. Okay, finally, with regard to depression, and what things besides popping pills you might do to help yourself out of the fog that is totally justifiable based on what is going on in the world. There's a 2016 paper that actually there's there's two papers here, one to 2016 and 120 19. That find that moderate to intense exercise does a tremendously good job of impacting depression. So let's see, I'll just show Zach, I think I did, I sent you the Belgian at all 2016. paper called sweating away depression, the impact of intensive exercise on depression. So what these what this paper finds, again, here, we have highlights on the screen. That, like I said, moderate intensity and high intensity exercise was found to improve depression, very low intensity exercise, like walking, while it's good for a whole lot of other things doesn't didn't seem to be particularly beneficial. And specifically, the participants in this, this is a small study. This is 30 men who showed signs of moderate depression. The participant showed a slight decrease in panic and fear and increased seeking behavior. So that's this is again, not zebrafish, but men who are showing increased seeking behavior and decreased panic and fear. After spending some regular time in moderate or intense exercise for an I think it was, I think it was like an hour a day, three days a week, like not not a tremendous amount even. But not just, you know, taking a walk, which has benefits for sure. But moderate to intense exercise with some regularity. Yes.

Bret 1:09:39
There's some part of me which just, you know, is thinking about the process. This is the downside of enlightenment that we needed. Hundreds of years of careful study for scientists to finally discover that going out in the sun and exerting yourself makes you feel better. There is another way to discover these things which might involve going outside and exerting yourself and discovering that you feel better. And my guess is some people may have I think it's

Heather 1:10:09
been tried by some. And then let me just point out that there there are many follow up papers and not even follow up. I mean, just like you say, this is at one level, so obvious. But there's a McIntyre at all 2019 article called physical activity and depression symptoms in women with chronic illness, and the mediating role of health related quality of life, which finds very similar results for not men with moderate depression, but women with chronic illness, that the effects of moderate intensity exercise are, are remarkably high, right, in treating quality of life symptoms, and, and indeed, in some cases, the symptoms of the diseases themselves. So I was thinking about this in the wake of our kayak last night. So three of us, Brett and I and our younger son Toby went out last night and just on the Willamette, just for you know, what, three miles each direction we put in one place and we

Bret 1:11:13
got corrected dinner.

Heather 1:11:14
We Yeah, we paddled downstream. But that may it was again such an amazing headwind, like it was really, really, really hard. We get out we go to dinner, we got back to the boats, actually, just as the sun was setting and so paddled back the 15 minutes or so upstream. But you know, all of that wind that would have been a tailwind taking this home had died. It was it was hard both ways. And the other three, and it was it was dark. By the time we got back there was about a, I was calling it like a 16 million or so that was beginning to set as we were, as we were pulling into the dock on the far end of my tweet

Bret 1:11:48
of this live stream included a very unusual cloud prism color bow that we saw only briefly a couple minutes, and it was gone just as we were just as we were arriving for sunset.

Heather 1:12:04
So it was, as we had arrived at the dock where we were then walking to get dinner. So it was an hour before sunset or so hour and a half before sunset. But it's all it takes is doing it to see the change in your own in your own mood. And of course, yes, your body as well. But don't underestimate the effects of this and don't waste the summer and the good weather for those of you who have it now, while while it's here. Alright, I cannot

Bret 1:12:34
resist going full evolutionary theorists on this question. Why would Why would you reset? What we have discovered is that going out in the sun and exerting yourself makes you feel better? And I'm thinking what else might so here's the hypothesis.

Heather 1:12:50
Oh, wow. What about the risky?

Bret 1:12:52
What about love? Do you think that might make people feel bad?

Heather 1:12:55
Yeah. Love. Actual connection? Touch?

Bret 1:12:59
Yeah. Finding bags of money with that.

Heather 1:13:03
Maybe I think that's a shorter term, shorter term.

Bret 1:13:07
Anything helps.

Heather 1:13:08
Okay, let's wait. We're, we're well over our hour. But we were asked in the q&a last time about movies that we enjoyed, and you gave a couple of answers. But I promise that we come back to it and I thought we might actually just move this up to the main, the main live stream just now that we've said a couple of movies. And, you know, basically, I always have a hard time with this question. And I went to a spreadsheet that we've made, that we've shared with our kids, as we're trying to figure out what to watch. And some of them are kid appropriate. And some of them aren't.

Bret 1:13:42
By the way, we show our kids kid inappropriate stuff. I'm not sure why we do that. But we are currently showing them Game of Thrones, which has lots of inappropriate I

Heather 1:13:51
think when they were four and six, we introduced them to the Life of Brian. So there's that

Bret 1:13:54
yes, yeah. Yeah.

Heather 1:13:57
So just a few of the movies from that list that we've been sort of adding to over the years that popped out for me, what were movies that we have appreciated, and only one of these have we gone back to and watched recently, Chinatown, Apocalypse Now. The Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind, The English Patient, lost in translation, and The Truman Show, a very eclectic list. And before you might want to add to it, I will also say again, none of these movies have I gone back to and watched recently, although probably I should, that I had an exquisite film education in high school, which focused in part on Italian and French New Wave cinema. And like I said, I haven't gone back to any of these recently. I've mentioned Jim. Yeah, so I was Breton. I actually met at crossroads at the school in Santa Monica, where I had been from seventh grade and came in 11th grade having been invited to leave his former school, which tell that story, another time perhaps. And it's a it's a private High School for the Arts and Sciences built around an alley in in Santa Monica, California and Jim Hosny was he's retired now but was an utterly extraordinary teacher there and I had him for five as a teacher for five I think of my six years that I was there. And, and some of the films specifically in the sort of Italian and French New Wave cinema genre that he showed us and how does analyze as you know, ninth 10th 11th 12th graders were that I that I enjoyed at the time were Fellini's satyricon from 1969 Truffaut's Jules and Jim from 60. To one wells, the discrete charm of the bourgeoisie from 1970 to Antonioni is blow up from 1966 and Bertolucci, I think Bertolucci only wrote the screenplay for this. Didn't direct it, but Bertolucci's 1900, which came out in 1976. So that's, again, a fairly diverse list of films, all of which I recommend. Do you have anything to add?

Bret 1:16:14
Yeah, you. You hit several the ones I had highlighted from our list Chinatown is marvelous from the point of view of understanding how things actually function. Great. Many people believe the greatest screenplay ever written, Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind is great for embracing the messiness of being human in light of the technological desire to interfere with it. Lost in Translation, I would say, similar topic, I would add,

Heather 1:16:46
that's one that we did actually recently watch. Again, and yes, it struck us both as as remarkable.

Bret 1:16:53
Yeah, it's a great, great film. I would add Rushmore, especially if you have someone in your life, who's smart, but doesn't fit very well with school. It's kind of an important, important film for that reason. What else was I thinking? Maybe Maybe that's good enough for now. But anyway, those those are great films, and we'd be interested in hearing Oh, I would say, We watched 12 monkeys, right before COVID showed up on our radar and that is an interesting film to look at now. It was just pure happenstance. Literally I think we had not heard of COVID yet and we watched 12 monkeys but it's quite something. Brazil I also find has aged quite well as a film. Maybe that's it.

Heather 1:17:49
Maybe that's it. So we will house has become our habit. Take a 15 minute break or so and come back afterwards to answer your questions from this hours. Super Chat as many as possible. And then your questions from the Super Chat next our

Bret 1:18:08
one announcement I should say there's been a slight change in schedule at Unity 2020 our voting system is apparently ready but it is not sufficiently well tested that we are ready to release it. So we are going to get there as quickly as possible. But we did not want anything to potentially Abend a good, honest accounting. So anyway, stay tuned and we will give you information as soon as voting is possible.

Heather 1:18:39
Excellent. And as as usual. I want to say Hi, there, you can become a dark horse member at my Patreon. Not yet this Sunday, we will have our monthly private q&a at 11am Pacific for those people who have joined at the $5 level or above. And there is a Discord server that is available as a benefit at that both of our Patreon

Bret 1:19:10
Yep. And we are coming towards the end of August Believe it or not. So that means that the next two Patreon discussions on my Patreon are going to be happening soon so you might sign up there. Maybe that's it and we'll see you in 15 minutes. That's right. Be well

This transcript was generated by https://otter.ai