Bret 0:10
Hey folks, welcome to the Dark Horse pod cast live stream number 74. And now for something completely an entirely different

Heather 0:18
yes indeed we're gonna go we're gonna go full monty python nishtar going electric.

Heather 0:22
What?

Bret 0:24
We're going electric. I couldn't Bob Dylan went electric. Oh, it caused credit quite a stir. Did it? Yes.

Heather 0:30
Okay. I, we weren't,

Bret 0:32
it was a betrayal of everything that he stood for. And this is a betrayal it

Heather 0:36
was this one was this.

Bret 0:38
Boy, I think it was just before. Boy, I shouldn't have introduced the topic like that without having looked it up. But it was a thing. Yeah. Okay.

Heather 0:49
So here we are, Episode 74. And we are indeed going to do something entirely different this time, we are going to start doing ads. And in support of that we are going to spend the entire episode after near the top of the hour here speaking ads for two products that we actually legitimately vouch for explaining what our position is on advertising, or why it is given what our position is on advertising, that we are now willing to do ads, and then we are going to present to you eight ads of our own for which we are no way being paid. And in some of those cases, it will be totally clear because the ads are not actually pro bono

Bret 1:27
work. It's pro bono learning simple pro bono, and simple.

Heather 1:31
So we are going to just in a couple seconds here, do a couple of ads for products that we are now being paid to advertise. But first one, just one announcement at the top of the

Bret 1:45
direction, we'll go with your announcement my correction

Heather 1:48
we have for for our patrons. So we're working on a replacement for Super Chat, such that we are not as beholden to YouTube, and so that YouTube doesn't take the 35 to 40% of the revenue that we generate with with any other revenue that we generate with them. So we tried out a test of the system several weeks ago, and it didn't end up working. But we went ahead and did the half hour, just live stream anyway, we called it wrong answers to bad questions. And it was actually a ton of fun. So we're going to do another one of those for our patrons only. I think it's going to be this Monday at 5pm. And I haven't posted it on the Patreon yet, we will do that. And then once if once you are a member of our Patreon $5 level or above, you'll be able to access that and you will be able to ask No, no, we'll do it with the chat. Right and then I don't know if we're going to do wrong answers to bad questions again, and maybe we should do wrong answers to good questions or good answers to bad questions. We should we should talk about any other ideas.

Bret 2:52
Even greatness for fun and profit. No, no. All right, that can't be it. Well, we'll come up with something. Yes.

Heather 2:59
Okay. What's your correction?

Bret 3:01
My correct so we have made a policy of doing corrections on the show when we get something wrong, it's painful but it's great to get on the other side of these things. Last week, I was proposing a solution to the ever given stuck in the Suez Canal and I suggested a ship full of dried fruit and cabbage to come in the canal behind the ship and dislodge it. kind of push it along right now I should have said prune juice and bran muffins it would have been way funnier. I at least would have got you would have gotten immediately and I think there would have been a whole lot more clarity so I just want to say no it's a correction it is important to get these things right we take them seriously and I speak for myself I will do better all right thank god yes right

Heather 3:55
oh well if that's all it took

Bret 3:58
well it was not an easy week for me

Heather 4:00
oh yeah No, I

Bret 4:01
didn't after realizing almost immediately that I had said something suboptimal as far as punch line goes and then having to live with it through this now I feel better now but shado so right okay, I

Heather 4:14
think we all do. I can imagine that. Yes,

Heather 4:17
yes. Okay, so I think we should we're going to do these two ads. So this is obviously very new to us. And then we will launch it and we feel about it and I will talk about how we feel about ads and then we will do our pro bono ad work right now for eight products that you won't see coming

Bret 4:36
right up at the top of the top of the list of ads. Zack, do you want to Here we go. That little bracket if you're watching on YouTube shows you that we are now in advertising space. That's right. Okay, so let's talk VPN VPN. Yes, what is VPN VPN is a virtual private network and it is something You definitely need Why do you need it, you need it because we're living in an era in which we have tremendous security problems. And in which there's all kinds of forces trying to limit what content you can view where that you might want to sidestep. So a virtual private network allows you to do both these things. It allows you to surf anonymously, even from the perspective of your ISP who, frankly, in a private window on your browser can still see where you're going.

Heather 5:28
And in fact, in the US, your ISP is legally allowed to sell what it sees of your searches to advertisers or to, to rather to advertisers, potentially, but to anyone at once.

Bret 5:39
Yes. And so you want to feel your activity from your ISP, no matter what it's good practice whether or not you're surfing anything that they would give a damn about or not, you just simply should shield yourself. And so we are endorsing Express VPN. So you need a VPN. And then the question is, well, there are many of them available to you which one should you want. And I must say I've been on this VPN thing for a long time. And things have gotten a great deal better at first it bogged your connection down so much that it was a huge trade off but now

Heather 6:12
and you were just constantly aware that you were interfacing the internet through via an a VPN there was it was it was anything but invisible to you the user right now. And that's what Xpress feet

Bret 6:24
with ExpressVPN is quite different. The interface is thoroughly professional has lots of choices, they can present your connection from something like 160 different locations in 94 different countries, which is quite a spectacular diversity. It can be used, if you were traveling to China, for example, you can use it to evade the Chinese controls on what you can observe on the internet.

Heather 6:52
And, and because it's it is not just useful for avoiding, say people fishing for your information. While you're out in the world. It's really valuable at home as well, because your ISP is just your internet service provider is just as able to find and just as willing to find and source and sell your information when you're at home when you're out in the world. So absolutely, it's it's a valuable product to be using at home as well.

Bret 7:17
So you can use it at home. It works on virtually any device you can think of it certainly works on Android phones, iOS phones, and tablets, works on most smart TVs, which is really cool. It'll work on computer, whether it's Windows or Mac or Linux doesn't matter. It can work on any of these things. And it's incredibly seamless. And the delay if there is any is barely detectable, which is really the most important thing is one of these, you don't want it to bog down your streaming, for example. So and it's also super easy to set up. incredibly easy to set up. And it's very seamless, it just sort of lives in oil, at least on Mac, it lives in a bar at the top of the screen, you can turn it on and off and well you can switch what country you appear to be in. So all these things are important. Here's one example of something you might want to do. I'm not saying you want to do this, but the BBC limits which you can see with BBC One player, right, they put out content that you can't view from elsewhere in the world. But if from the perspective of the net, you appear to be in Britain, you can watch things now i'm not saying you should do this because of course, you have to be aware that Britain is part of the Five Eyes network and so nothing stops them from abducting you and waterboarding you in a black site for having watched the BBC without permission. But were you willing to take that risk, this mechanism would allow you to do it.

Heather 8:43
Wow. So we are encouraging you to protect your online activity today with this VPN, which has been rated number one by both CNET and wired. So you can visit our link which will allow you some discounts@expressvpn.com slash dark horse to receive an extra three months free on a year's subscription that's Express e x p r e s s vpn.com slash Dark Horse where you can learn more about ExpressVPN and also get that three months off offer. All right,

Bret 9:18
perfect. Now something is supposed to happen on the screen there No no no, no. Yes. Now we're gonna do our other our other ad.

Heather 9:27
All right. Okay, so our other ad is product I didn't bring into the room. Oh, no, it's not here. It's in the other room. So we don't we didn't need to have so

Bret 9:39
you're gonna have to use your imaginations here. Now those of you who are used to listening to us on audio only are used to imagining up the visuals. But in this case, imagine that we had a small bottle.

Heather 9:51
Well, I mean, to be fair, we didn't show ExpressVPN neither did we.

Bret 9:55
Well, that depends rather on whether or not they're already using it to watch. It exists as sort of an Invisible filter,

Heather 10:01
okay. So since we are just clearly quite new to all of this, and I cannot find my notes for

Bret 10:11
this, the lack of professionalism lends to the sense of authenticity, it does, it

Heather 10:15
does, okay. So we are also encouraging the use of a product called omaxe cryofreeze. And it is basically a stick that you roll on, that helps with pain. But before we talk about it and our experience with it in particular, we wanted to say a few words about pain itself, pain is useful pain is an indicator that something has gone wrong, that you've stretched something too far that you've ripped something that something is out of whack something is a missed a miss, sometimes being becomes chronic, at which point that pain signal is far less useful, right. And in some cases, also, even if the pain is acute, if the pain is so bad, that you really can't think straight with it, so long as you take it easy and don't try to push through now that you don't experience pain as the result of using a product. What you wouldn't have been able to do otherwise pain relief can be a very useful way, you know, one of these modern tools that we had far less access to in in anything but modern times. So

Bret 11:19
I would just add to that, that pain is an adaptation. Yeah, that it's a signal that you're either vulnerable or damaged and need to be extra wary to protect yourself. And modifying pain by anesthetizing which is an ancient tradition is effectively human beings doing what human beings do, we hack our own systems for improved effectiveness. So you shouldn't neutralize every old pain that you have some of that some of it is important in order to guard your protection of something potentially damaged so it can heal. But when you've got pain that you already know, you've got an issue and you're just sick of dealing with the pain, there is something to do.

Heather 12:00
That's right. So you wanted to talk a little bit about our experience with omaxe cryofreeze.

Bret 12:06
So people send us stuff that they want us to advertise and we got this product to test out and see. And I must admit I was a bit skeptical of it. We went skiing and I had a kind of a stiff neck after I do a fair amount of backward skiing, which involves a whole lot of craning your neck around in order not to run into things.

Heather 12:31
And then I've never

Bret 12:32
seen you run into anything I never run into. Yeah, I have run into precious few things forward or backward. But nonetheless, my neck hurt from this thing. And I thought well, what's it gonna hurt? So the omex cryofreeze has CBD in it. And so I rubbed it on my neck and I was immediately impressed that it gives you kind of a cool feeling. And it's got menthol smells nice. Yeah. So I sort of immediately caused your attention to it, but I wasn't really expecting very much. And then lo and behold, the pain went away and twice more. So I thought that could be anecdote, it could be pain goes away of its own accord. And two more times I had pain and I thought, okay, I'll try it out. And so you know, there's a lot to be said about what it is that pain and your one's subjective perception of it is but I can say three for three. In the case of this particular product, it seemed to go away.

Heather 13:29
I also had a good experience with it. And a friend of ours again, this is this is all anecdote, but a friend of ours who suffers from chronic pain from a number of debilitating injuries in the past has had terrific success, alleviating some of that chronic pain.

Bret 13:46
And I will say Finally, I was a little concerned because I have tried CBD for pain before I've tried CBD tea, and it triggers my allergy to marijuana. It causes my lungs to fill with goo and so I wondered whether or not this would do and it definitely did not. So in all I can say is that every experience with it was positive. And it did seem to have a good effect and it didn't trigger the one thing that I feared might be negative.

Heather 14:15
Yeah. So omaxe health, which is the company that creates omaxe cryofreeze is offering our listeners 20% off a full bottle of cryofreeze CBD pain relief roll on, which is the product that we have used successfully. And this discount is also applied to any product on their site, actually 20% off the entire site. Go to omaxe health.com and enter the code once again Darkhorse so that's o MAX health.com. The code Darkhorse to get 20% off both cryofreeze which we recommend and any of their products sitewide

Bret 14:49
awesome. And let us know what you think. Right? We are out of paid advertising

Heather 14:56
so we are out of paid advertising space but this entire episode, we are We're going to spend talking about advertising and then doing, like I said, Oh, eight, eight pro bono ads at the end, which I think we're gonna have some fun with.

Bret 15:09
All right,

Heather 15:10
all right. Okay, you want to start us out? Yes, ripping on advertising.

Bret 15:14
So let us just say we have resisted participating in advertising for quite some time, we've been approached numerous times about the possibility. And we have felt, and I will speak for myself, I still feel that advertising is part of the problem, maybe a substantial part of the problem. In fact, I would even say, it is something like the root of all evil, that there is something about human beings in modern times where from the moment we wake up in the morning to we go to bed at night, we are constantly being bombarded by advertisements. And while obviously, there is something about advertisements that could be informative. In general, if you watch advertisements, and you say, Well, what percentage of what's actually going on here is telling me something I don't know, and what percentage is manipulating me into feeling some way that may have nothing to do with the product, or may in fact be paradoxical, right? It happens that I may feel some way about a shampoo based on the fact that they've shown an attractive model who is ostensibly using the shampoo and having the right effect on the crowd that the person walks into. I don't know what it is. But the point is, at some level, the rational response to advertising, when it is not informative, should probably be to punish the advertiser, right? Because, in some sense, if you take two bottles of shampoo, like let's say you're at the, you know, at the market, you looked at two bottles of shampoo, and they appeared to be equivalent, but one of them you had seen an advertisement for and the other one, you had not. At the same price, well, you would say, Well, what fraction of the budget for this shampoo went into advertising rather than higher quality ingredients, or research or whatever else might improve the product?

Heather 17:02
Well, there was, in fact, a line of products for a while, I haven't seen it in stores for a while. And maybe it's just not in the stores that I go to called ad free. Right? That specifically was effectively created on the basis that what you see is what you get. And there's obviously always hidden costs in the form of r&d and packaging, and you don't know what salary is. But there's no you're not paying for them to have communicated to other people who aren't you about how great their product is?

Bret 17:29
Yes. Now, the funny thing is, because we are the monkeys that we are, the idea of an entire ad free zone of the market does not take off like wildfire, because the fact is, we are manipulable. And very frequently, we're most manipulated when we don't even think we're the target of an advertisement. So Oh, go

Heather 17:51
ahead. Well, um, you know, this might be the right moment to talk about how advertising is hardly new to humans. Right? That we, you know, there are many kinds of ways that organisms advertise to one another. And we should talk a little bit about some of those, in fact, we probably should have pulled up some pictures, but I actually think it might be worth just talking briefly about a framing a new kind of framing that I believe, I believe you proposed. So whereas Darwin first said, Okay, we got natural selection, and we've got sexual selection, where a natural, very broad brush natural selection is about survival and sexual selection is about reproduction, you have proposed perception mediated selection, which is that selection, which can, which is about communication between two entities, individuals of some sort doesn't have to be the same species, in which the perception of the individual receiving the communicated signal is is decided decides what happens next. And the perception may not actually be reflective of reality. But if the perception is such a thing, then that's going to change behavior. And that's what needs to happen.

Bret 19:06
Right? So I didn't know that we were headed here. But yeah, the the the point, the reason to declare a different category than the original Darwinian one, is that actually there's a lot of sexual selection that isn't perception mediated, and behaves much more like natural selection, yes. And then there's a lot of stuff over natural selection space that is perception mediated, where you get the same kinds of stuff you see in sexual selection, and so, really, my point is,

Heather 19:32
so advertising is all in perception media and selection space,

Bret 19:35
right? Because it is inherently perception mediated, that is to say whether you have succeeded or failed is based on the perception of some other individual right are you hiding from them are you augmenting some characteristic, whether or not it works is dependent on their perception, but the point is, when perception is the mechanism through which selection is acting, deception is a huge fraction of the Game, right? So sexual selection looks weird because so much of it is perception mediated and therefore deception is all over the place.

Heather 20:08
Well, so deception isn't inherent to perception media selection, however, reception opens the door to deception deception opens the door to deception, right? So you obviously can have honest indicators of quality with things like the you know, the song of a bird or the plumage of a bird over in, you know, traditional sexual selection space or honest indicators of say toxicity with regard to say, the clades of frogs that I have worked on the dark poison frogs in the Neo tropics are the Mentos in Madagascar, which are honestly indicating, with their bright coloration, that they also have these toxins onboard these lipophilic alkaloids. And however, you also end up with mimics of the honestly advertising species that may basically be able to signal toxicity, say, without actually bringing along the cost of having built the toxins.

Bret 21:02
So my point would be that the reason that sexual select selection space looks weird is this arms race, right? So females in general, try to force males into displays that can't be fixed. Right, right. And so, in some sense, the reason that so many male displays are so expensive, is that there is no way to build them out of some material that's close to free, and get away with it because they wouldn't function. So in any case, we can talk more about that another time. But let's just say that in our cautious embrace of the advertising modality, we are aiming not to manipulate but to engage in advertising that informs you about something that you probably do want to know and at least think about whether or not the the object in question is something that you'd be better off with. And certainly deception has no place so that this is a small fraction of the available landscape of things that might be advertised that is actually available to us.

Heather 22:09
Yes, indeed, we were we were approached about a number of products that we rejected. And in some cases, I think the products are good products given what they do. But we disagree with the premise of their of them being out there in the world and the way they are or what their claims are or something and we're not we're not here to dismiss those products publicly. But just to say that what we will end up vouching for here are things that we actually do, are doing without qualms,

Bret 22:39
right. And so in some sense, the other way I think of viewing this is that the reason that I've joked about advertising being the root of all evil is that it becomes the driving force, any place that it is the mechanism through which things are paid for. So you, as the viewer become the product, you know, you are delivered to advertisers, and you get something ostensibly for free. But really, it's not free, because the advertisers be paying for it if they didn't get access to your mind in a way that they could affect it. You wanted to say something?

Heather 23:13
Well, at some point here, I have a bit to talk about specifically with regard to people becoming the products when they are unwittingly. So when they don't know.

Bret 23:22
Alright, well, we'll come back. So I'll just say, we in doing this, we will have to not do this to the extent that there's anything pulling us in the direction of making you in the audience into the product. So in order for you not to be the product, we have to be effectively doing double duty, which is to say, telling you things that we think are your in your interest to to know about. Alright, do you want to?

Heather 23:50
Yeah, so we talked about how advertising is ancient. And it opens the door to deception without being inherently deceptive, it could just be a communication of state of quality. But it certainly you know, that ancient and sometimes honorable history has experienced, cool, quite an acceleration of the dishonesty in modern times. So I want to just tell a brief story and then read a tiny bit from an article written by Gloria Steinem in 1990. Actually, in college, I was proud to be a founding subscriber to the ad free version of MS magazine, Ms magazine was formed in the early 70s, founded in part by Gloria Steinem, as a kind of a feminist magazine, that was about things that would pertain to things that would be of interest to women. That was not however, women's magazine, women's magazines, tending to pander to stereotypes, like you either belong in the kitchen and then you know, only with your children and therefore we're going to talk about Things like cooking and childcare only or two other kinds of stereotypes. All you want to do is get a man and so we are going to pander to and

Bret 25:11
I have never felt that way

Heather 25:12
you haven't when you Yes. You walked out walked in and said that pander to that part of, of womanhood. And so lots of articles on beauty and hotness and sexiness, and fashion and makeup and all. And Ms was was not about that. So, what had happened, though, over the course of two ish decades, was that it had a very, very hard time attracting advertisers who did not dictate content. And so Indeed, I actually I did, I did a big research project on this in college a couple years after this essay that Steinem wrote, came out researching exactly how advertisers drive editorial content, specifically at magazines, directed at teen girl since I had at that point, been a teen girl recently, and had been an occasional reader of the magazine 17 and was, you know, even then, as a like a 13 year old because that's really the target audience of 17 you're just appalled and pretty disgusted. And you know, I spent less time with that magazine than than a lot of people of my generation but I still I spent some time with it. And I was still affected. And I didn't know then, but was not surprised to find out later, how much power the advertisers actually had on driving the actual so called content, the editorial content of the magazine. So here's just a couple of examples. From and these examples happened to be from this Steinem article, but there are plenty more out there. During and this is not for girls, this is not for teen girls magazines, but actually at Ms. Magazine, Dow's cleaning products need were needed to be adjacent to children or fashion editorial. maidenform, which is a maker of bras and other apparel required that quote, no negative content, be adjacent to the ads including anything quote, relating to illness, disillusionment, or large size fashion. debeers diamond company prohibited magazines from placing its ads next to quote, hard news or anti love or romance themed editorial. Okay, so this is totally invisible to most readers of magazines, right? And it turns out that for historical reasons that I won't go into here, women's magazines, and then girls magazines really were targeted by advertisers more so than any of the other magazines, because they were understood to be basically catalogs for women rather than places where women could learn about how to be in the world. So

Heather 27:53
So one more thing from what what we know simply from Ms magazine, which should have been more immune to this than anything else. Here's an anecdote that she that that that Steinem reports, after years of trying to get advertisers even to play ball with her. So she not only were advertisers coming in the door and demanding what's called complimentary content content that actually put their products into it or said nice things about their products in the so called editorial content, or at least didn't put things they disagreed with on the same pages are sometimes in the same issue. But she couldn't even get some advertisers to come in the door. And here's one story. Out of hutzpah and desperation I arranged a lunch with Leonard Lauder, president of Estee Lauder. With the exception of Clinique, which is the brainchild of Carol Phillips none of waters hundreds of products has been advertised in Ms. A year schedule of ads for just three or four of them could save us indeed as a sign of a family owned company whose ad practices are followed by the beauty industry. He is one of the few men who could liberate many pages in all women's magazines just by changing his mind about complimentary copy. Again complimentary copy is this, this euphemism for you have to you have to change the actual content of your magazine if we are going to put ads in your magazine. over lunch that cuts costs more than we can pay for some articles I Steinem explained the need for the his leadership. I also lay out the record of Ms. More literary and journalistic prizes. One more new issues introduced into the mainstream new writers discovered an impact on society than any other magazine, more articles that became bookstores that became movies ideas that became television series, and newly advertised products that became profitable and most important for him a place for his ads to reach women who aren't reachable through any other women's magazine. Indeed, if there was one constant characteristic of the ever changing ms, readership, it is their impact as leaders, whether it's waiting until later to have first babies or pioneering pass some protection and cosmetics, whatever they are doing today, a third to a half American level we do in three to five years from now it's never failed. But he says, Ms. readers are not our women. They're not interested Didn't things like fragrance and blush, if they were mirrored write articles about them. On the contrary, explain surveys show they are more likely to buy such things and the readers of say cosmopolitan, or Vogue, they're good customers, because they're out in the world enough to need several sets of everything home work, purse, travel, gym, and so on. They just don't need to write articles about these things. Now, they just don't need to read articles about these things. What he asked a men's magazine to publish monthly columns on how to shave before he advertised around us products his line for men. he concedes that beauty features are often concocted more for advertisers than readers. But Ms isn't appropriate for his ads. Anyway, he explains why. Because Estee Lauder, he says is selling a kept woman mentality. I can't quite believe this 60% of the users of his products are salaried and generally resemble ms readers. Besides his company has the appeal of having been started by a creative and hardworking woman, his mother, Estee Lauder, that doesn't matter. He says he knows his customers, and they would like to be kept women. That's why he will never advertise in Ms. Right? So that's some of what's going on behind the scenes with advertisers.

Bret 31:10
Well, can I can I riff from there four seconds. Okay. So this raises really the next issue that I was hoping to talk about, which is, I have a ledge, and I'm trying to be aware, maybe it doesn't matter. Maybe it was even here on dark horse. That part of what is going on with the derangement of the West. And I really think you know, it's a psychosis of sorts that we are watching with a loss of the ability to track arguments and to extrapolate reasonably. And all of that is actually being driven by the fact that so much of the landscape through which we are interacting is advertising driven. And my point is, that that probably means that we are getting content that looks very different than we would otherwise be getting not because human beings don't want the higher quality, nuanced content. But because advertisers do not want us in general in our conscious mind. They want us in our subconscious mind where we can't necessarily track that we're being manipulated and persuaded of things that may not be factual, right. So the idea is factual content that caused you to have to think might be very desirable from the point of view of the consumer of the channel. But it would not be desirable from the point of view of an advertiser that really wants you in something, you know, just above sleep level of awareness. And so in our case, I think the answer is, we don't want any ad for which the advertiser isn't looking to have you in your conscious mind evaluating these claims and whether or not it adds up to you at a conscious level, that's the desire is only that fraction of advertising that is not looking to catch you off guard

Heather 32:55
that's really good, including when the point of the product is actually both of the ones that we advertised here today is to background some complexity so that you can get on with your life,

Bret 33:05
right? Oh, that's good. I haven't even realized that connection between them. Yep. So

Heather 33:13
you do not want to be conscious of everything going on in your life at all times. That gets deeply painful and becomes unproductive very quickly. But you want to be able to call to consciousness, anything that you're being exposed to any decisions you are making. before deciding actually I want to set and forget I do want to have brand loyalty over in this space because I just don't care about laundry detergent that much or whatever it is right? But you need at any moment to be able to say Wait, actually it's time to reassess and I think we will certainly never we will never advertise anything with our words where we are trying to subvert that process.

Bret 33:52
And any you know, we will because we scrutinize all of these things and we have been approached by many different potential advertisers we think about them very consciously so yep, when we bring them to you it's because they pass that process

Heather 34:04
so I guess maybe we want before we embark on our eight pro bono ads to talk a little I mean, I think you've already done it but given how we clearly feel about advertising and what we what kinds of harms we know it does in the world why would want anything to do with it we're doing we're doing well right now thank you to the many supportive and and generous viewers and listeners and people on our Patreon we are at the moment doing well but it is to some degree at the

Bret 34:34
at the discretion

Heather 34:35
discretion of YouTube, Patreon and Google and YouTube and Google being the same thing. And so diversifying as much as possible where it is that we are, how it is that we are generating our our money is so that we can continue to speak absolute truth without being without being dependent on the pleasure of someone you know, at any point that someone When we are advertising says actually it's not working for me they, Paul, that's fine. And at any point that we someone approaches us and says we want you to advertise for them. And we say not for us, we just don't go there.

Bret 35:11
So I would also point out, and this is delicate, because it is very difficult to prove in any way, that would be clear, but we get access to the back channel information for the Dark Horse YouTube channel, for example. And it has ceased adding up the podcast appears to be more popular than ever, which you would expect news of it would spread. And people seem to very much like it. On the other hand, we see a trend in viewership coming from Google that clearly indicates that in spite of the fact that it's popular with those who see it, that they're showing it to fewer people. And so what does this portend? Would they Buddhists, you know, at the point that they thought it wouldn't cause a stir? I don't know, but let us just say it is a vulnerable position. And from the point of view, you know, of our long term ability to speak the truth irrespective of what comes at us. It is, it is important that we carefully take this step.

Heather 36:14
Indeed, did you want to say anything about advertising to children? Or should we save that?

Bret 36:19
Um, yeah, it's probably worth as long as we're spending the topic, the time here, I would just say that, you know, as a measure of how dangerous advertising has become, I have for at least 15 years been making the claim that I believe there is no defense of advertising to children, that it is impossible to come up with a rationale whereby it is acceptable, for example, to have the a company that produces food advertising to children in a way that might change what it is they desire to eat, or how much they desire to eat. And that clearly we have an epidemic of ill health based in inability to regulate desire for food both type and amount amongst children for which there is no known cause other than the fact that we have lots of corporations pushing various things in the direction of children. So anyway, I keep asking, Can anybody come up with a defense of the right of a company to advertise to a child who is presumably without the defenses that an adult might have and even adults aren't all that well defended? Right? And so I guess what I would say in closing is that the degree of harm that comes from dis regulating children's interaction with something like food and the same could be said of a lot of other things, you know, what what it is they desire and are therefore, persuaded to pursue that advertising to children effectively Mames people, right, it does things that are as harmful to them as I don't know child molesting something like that. And to the extent that the society allows this to continue, and doesn't do anything, even though it is at least very difficult, and maybe impossible to come up with a justification that makes any sense is a measure of how much we have fallen into the trap of imagining that advertising is just like a feature of the landscape and not something that we grant access.

Heather 38:23
Very good. All right. should be should we do our pro bono Okay, we're gonna alternate right? Wow, this is not it's not like Oh, well. For those of you just listening, I just dropped several things off screen. For most of these products, we both have an end and we have a relationship with the product. Your relationship with this product is I think entirely through my relationship with the product. So if you are an avid reader of physical books, and you don't know about book darts, you should if you read books, but it's all online, or you don't really care for books that much and you'd never find yourself going to your bookshelf and opening books that you've read before. You don't want this product but if you do have you know upon moving into a home insisted the one of the first things that needs to happen is that we need to install lines and lines of bookshelves as we did here. Then this this is an amazing an amazing thing. So book darts are little tiny markers that made of metal, that are better than inking up your book better than bookmarks better than post it flags. They stick but they aren't permanent. They don't deform the book, no matter how many are in there. So I have this pile which because zoom down on me you can't see but I this pile of books, I just pulled five books off of our shelves that I know that I had read or re read recently enough to a book darted and so this one, which we will probably spend a whole episode talking about at some point anatomy an epidemic. I don't know if you can see just how many book darts are inside that by the little by little glimmers, but the book is not deformed by it. And anytime that I pick up a book that I've read, I open it to any one of book darts and I see not just something of value from the book. But something about my state of mind when I was reading it what caught my eye. And it's sort of it's a, it's a, it's a kind of memory hack, I find a way to re insert myself into into long pieces of text, either fiction or nonfiction that I've enjoyed before, but might be unlikely to pick up and read from scratch again. So I have several of these turns around the house, Brett can attest to that. And I think you're now so accustomed to the telltale sound of the tin being opened. But sometime if I'm reading it in bed at night, you'll you'll hear that and find some of the book dark money, right? So I just I literally pulled five books that I respect off the shelf and open them to one of the book darted places, I'm just going to read you a sentence or two from each of these book dark places, which also will reveal five books that I think are terrific, I don't actually have just, I did not decide an order in advance. So we'll start with anatomy of an epidemic by Robert Whittaker, extraordinary and terrifying book. Just one line in this. He says, with regard to a presenter at an APA audience, I conclude the patients with schizophrenia not on anti psychotic medication for a long period of time, have significantly better global functioning than those on anti psychotics. That alone is worth the price of admission to this book. When you see that there there are data to support the idea that united psychotics are likely doing more harm than good. So that's why we have actually I'll do the fiction last we have Margaret Mead, sex and temperament and three primitive societies. So actually introduction by Helen Fisher, who we know the so this is originally written in 1935. And just from the introduction, one of the things I bookmarked, I booked darted is. to have these tribes have no idea that men and women are different in temperament. They allow them different economic and religious roles, different skills, different vulnerabilities to evil, magic and supernatural influences. The era Pash believed that painting and color is appropriate only to men, and the maneuver more considered fishing and essentially feminine, feminine task. But any idea that temperamental traits of the order of dominance, bravery, aggressiveness, objectivity, malleability, are inalienable associated with one sex as opposed to the other is entirely lacking. This may seem strange to a civilization which is in its which in its sociology its medicine, it's slang it's poetry in its obscenity accepts the socially defined differences between the sexes is having an innate basis. She goes on. so fascinating little bit of cultural anthropology there from Margaret Mead from the early part of the 20th century. We have Alice draggers, excellent book Galileo's middle finger heretics activists in the search for justice and science, in which among many other revelations and this is published by this is probably going to be 2016 2015. You gave this to me?

Heather 43:20
Probably 2017. You bet. That didn't so this is from chapter five the rot from within.

Heather 43:31
I didn't mean that these scientists or I or anyone else existed without bias. It didn't mean their work wasn't shaped and sometimes tainted by politics, ideologies and loyalties. But it did mean they tried to adhere to an intellectual agenda that wasn't first only political if they believe that good science couldn't be done just by just weed you boring your answers. Good scholarship had to put the search for truth first on the quest for social justice. Second. That's trigger a while ago, a while ago, a while ago,

Bret 43:58
I got you that before we met her, am I right?

Unknown 44:01
Yes, yes. Yes. Before evergreen blew up. Yeah. Before, back in the before time.

Heather 44:07
Another kind of before times. Yep. This excellent novel meeting by Norman rush, which was actually I see from the inscription given to me as a gift by Elizabeth right. When we were all on barro Colorado Island together when she was writing a book that largely started you. tapers morning bath, it appears morning bath. Yeah. So she gave me this book thinking I would enjoy it and it's really extraordinary. And here's a line here's a slight paragraph from it. With her She's the author here is speaking about his protagonist. One thing one thing wrong with America, according to Dunoon is that the society is converging to suppress unsupervised mass play, largely through the mechanisms of TV and adult run sports like little league. His theory was that if you leave young males alone, they will go and play situations from fascism to feudalism to democracy So now there is a diffuse and afforded attraction to fascism, fascism, excuse me, that is getting played out at the adult level. He was fecund with theories. And one more just again to point out how rich the leaving behind a trail of book darts can be in terms of finding, finding evidence of great thinking in the books on yourself. This is from a novel another excellent novel called the overstory by powers that just came out a year or two ago I think. And this about one of the protagonists again, the clarity of recent weeks, the sudden waking from sleepwalk is certainty that the world has been stolen in the atmosphere trash for the shortest of short term gains, the sense that he must do all he can to fight for the living world's most wondrous creatures. All these abandoned Adam and his left in the insanity of denying the bedrock of human existence, property and mastery nothing else counts. Earth will be monetized until all trees grow in straight lines. Three people own all seven continents and every large organism is bred to be slaughtered.

Bret 46:03
You did all that with book darts?

Heather 46:05
I did all that. Yeah. So that's that's my pitch for book darts.

Bret 46:10
You know, it's actually it's kind of marvelous because the fact that they do not physically alter the book in a permanent way but do physically live in the book in a way that it's easier to find. And if you've written something I've never been a fan of this you know, if you don't write in your books, you're not you're a faker kind of mentality for what? I would never write in a book because a I wouldn't be able to read it. Right? Right. What good would it do me? And B it just feels like you know defacing something Yeah, maybe if one had marvelous penmanship, it would be different

Heather 46:41
but yeah, and I so one thing I do when I when I'm just taking a book out to the world and if I don't have a bag with me and so don't also have a ton of book darts is I lined the last pages page of the book, which is a line of book darts so that if I do come upon something that I want to remember for later, I can pull it off the back page and put it where it goes.

Bret 46:58
Totally. And if you do find yourself out, you don't have them, you can go into any 711 and you can ask the person behind the counter and get a quizzical look for free for free

Heather 47:07
physical looks for free at almost any 711 near you.

Bret 47:12
Anything yet your locals have already you can drive across the state to a different 711 if you want a variety Sure,

Heather 47:18
sure. Okay, that's that's ad number one of eight

Bret 47:22
ad number one

Heather 47:23
you were going to do this one? Yes. didn't want me to say by name?

Bret 47:28
No. Okay, so I wanted to talk to you all about the question of security. Do you ever look at your home and worry that somebody is going to sneak into your backyard break in and take your stuff? And then you think well what would the best solution to this be? Right? There's obvious dangers to having a firearm. What you really need are dinosaurs. Right? A good dinosaur will give a burglar a scare like they wouldn't believe Oh man, what are you going to do? How are you going to get them are you going to go online and buy some dinosaurs you could but they might fly off. So the best thing to do

Heather 48:09
this is awesome.

Bret 48:12
It's a little goofy. Alright. The best thing to do is to attract wild dinosaurs to your backyard. terrify our tariffs chirping dinosaur actually Zack Do you want to show I sent you a couple of dinosaur pictures yeah yeah, here's one I took that picture just yesterday of a little bird oh it's a little one it's a little n and here is how I attracted it to our backyard in order to scare off would be burglars

Heather 48:43
and if I Bay you you bought so for people just listening you've got a hummingbird at some kind of a glass and metal contraption which you bought at the thing that you're advertising here which is extent dinosaur stores

Bret 48:55
yeah the dinosaur store

Heather 48:59
yeah which goes by various names depending on where you are it's the way

Bret 49:03
I got you a little something I know what you're thinking you're thinking it's not your birthday which it isn't

Heather 49:10
but just from the extent dinosaur store it is from the extended I open it and open it right wow okay the extent is restored and Brett have delivered unto me this is actually you know remarkably well wrapped for it dude

Bret 49:23
I was actually I was going to say that as I grow cept

Heather 49:27
it's kind of prime box and

Bret 49:28
older and more manly I get worse and worse at wrapping presents yep

Heather 49:33
okay okay so I did not see this coming guys the extent on sir Oh look at this yeah extent does or store does not sell extent I suppose but it sells ways ways track them. There

Bret 49:45
you go. And we

Heather 49:47
used to break in after you've attracted them. Except I can't open that. Oh.

Bret 49:51
Lips up on the side there.

Heather 49:55
Oh, on the side side Yeah, saying there's a little critter even that's not an extent dinosaur but Something arthropod looks like cool So what kind of extent dinosaur is this nest box likely to attract to me now

Bret 50:08
you know it's funny covered in nesting material but I yet you're welcome

Heather 50:17
I feel safer already as well you should Yeah Can we arm the birds though because that it feels to me would solve a couple problems

Bret 50:28
yes i there may be regulations on this that we would want to check on before engaging in as publisher in the army yep I also got you some of that insect and hot pepper Sue at you like

Heather 50:41
oh yeah i think i'm i think i won't eat that on air but but this is this is fabulous even if you're not an extent dinosaur yourself Actually no, I think really you have to be an extent Iser which is to say an avian dinosaur.

Bret 50:55
A bird Yes. So anyway, the the advertisement here is for your local bird supply shop to attract these animals to your your, your yard, and I will say

Heather 51:10
there's something important here, which is that the hot pepper is here not because birds love hot pepper. But because mammals don't. And birds can't birds can't detect it. Yes, in fact, capsaicin

Bret 51:22
here's the beautiful thing about that story is it turns out that the capsaicin was loaded into chili peppers because chili peppers are distributed by birds and it is loaded in to trick mammals into thinking that they are doing damage to themselves when they eat the chili peppers. So the chili peppers will be left over for birds to eat and therefore distribute the seeds which they do much better than mammals do. So the thing is, I always think it is a good idea to attract extinct dinosaurs whether or not they're keeping you safer but I never think at the right time of year and this time it's the right time of year at least here in the Northern Hemisphere it's spring so animals are nesting and putting up bird boxes is a good idea. And so anyway that's why this birthday present is a

Heather 52:07
little early that's awesome thank you yeah more bugs more birds more beautiful yeah maybe need a little help on the ad copy but that's okay, that's okay. insect and hot peppers do it

Bret 52:19
excellent insect and hot pepper

Heather 52:20
soup. Alright um Are we done with the extent dinosaur stores

Bret 52:24
ad I believe so.

Heather 52:25
Okay. pro bono ad to extent dinosaur stores. pro bono ad three is four Did you find a picture of me in the jungle but I sure

Bret 52:36
did. Exactly what you want that now. Now hold on a second Zack

Heather 52:41
no no we could put it up. So the next time you find yourself in the jungle Do yourself a favor and wear agle boots now is this in fact from our time in the Amazon last Okay, so I most recently, in fact wearing a cowboy boots here in the Amazon the jungle, for those who don't know is more accurately called and you can take it off whenever lowland tropical rainforest. Okay, jungles can be found in Honduras and Costa Rica and Brazil and Ecuador and Madagascar and Indonesia. and India and Papua New Guinea, lots of places, among many, among many other places, but let's parse the term for a moment. Why you know why boots in jungles. Why this particular type of boots and jungles Well, a jungle being a lowland tropical rainforest is well into tropical rainforest lowland refers to elevation, so it's close to sea level, tropical refers to it being within 23 and a half degrees of the Tropic of the equator that's within the tropic lines. And both proximity to the equator and elevation are correlated with a high biodiversity. And lowland tropical ecosystems are going to be high biodiversity, lots of critters that are interested in, in getting at you or, or in other ways, kind of maybe just impeding your progress. Rain Forest just refers to the type of precipitation that falls as opposed to cloud forests and cloud forests, the precipitation tends to hang as water droplets in clouds. It does, of course, rain, but the experience of being in a cloud forest is very much a being in a cloud and the experience of being in a rain forest is very much of being frequently quite what because you're being rained on. The rain is seasonal, but the seasons are like wet and wetter. And that means mud. Okay, so you've got this hot, wet seething mass of biodiversity in the jungle, which again, lowland tropical rainforests being the technical term, and it's kind of a heaven for some of us. Some of us really, you're driven to go there and we were lucky enough to be in the Amazon in January of 2020, just before the entire world locked down. But it is, as I said, deeply, and unendingly muddy, and there's also acceptance some places like Madagascar tend to be a fair number of poisonous snakes. So to protect yourself from both mud and snakes. You wear as close to knee high as you can get rubber boots. The rubber boots mean that you don't get mud into your shoes as you're slogging through and occasionally step into deep mud puddles which happens a lot and the thick rubber keeps is protection against a snake bite a few should manage to step on one because they tend to be cryptic and it it comes out you I've only had that happen once that I know of where I actually saw a fair deal on strike at my boot. And I wasn't wearing ankle boots them but I was wearing boots that were good enough it was actually in the Amazon it was in the Brazilian Amazon. No actually that was in Costa Rica. That was in Costa Rica I stepped on one in the Brazilian Amazon as well but it it just eyed me I got away without it striking at me. So when you know when we lead our study abroad trip in 2016 and when I led the several that I led before that the one one of the very few actually hard and fast rules that I had was jungle boots at all times, no matter what when you're in the forest, no exceptions. And a lot of field stations have a lot of rules about keeping people safe, including you can never go into the forest alone never go into the jungle alone. I actually reject that rule completely once once you are once you know something about what you're doing, and have demonstrated proficiency and how to navigate and and deal with things that come up. I actually I'm not sure I've enforced going solitarily into the jungle but it was certainly one of the things that I really strongly encouraged because there's nothing like being alone in the jungle with just you and well your jungle boots and you know whatever else you're wearing.

Unknown 56:38
But

Heather 56:41
the boots were non negotiable because of the mud because of the snakes. And the fact is that cheap rubber boots are available in towns, near jungles, every place that we've been, even I think even I think in Madagascar where there's only nothing available. They tend to be lower than might be optimal. You know, if you're dealing with big terrestrial vipers, they can launch themselves a little bit higher and you don't you don't want to risk that. And they tend to be a little thin, they tend to be flimsy. Most of what they tend to be is really uncomfortable. Yeah. And your blisters, they give you blisters, you can get them on and off easily to you know empty them of water after you've been drenched into their downpour but but they're not comfortable. And if you're actually interested in slogging around the jungle all day, as some of us are, and I encourage everyone who has the opportunity to do so. You want these boots, so they're not cheap, but they're amazing. They're Eagle boots, Eagle, AIG, l e Eagle boots right here on the podcast, podcast. These were first actually introduced to me by a student of ours on that. On that study abroad trip. She was she was going on about how great they were and they were not cheap. And I thought how good could they possibly be? they wrap up tight. They feel so comfortable. They're actually impermeable to fangs. And they're fabulous.

Bret 58:06
Yes, they are not cheap, except in comparison to not having them. Yes, yeah, exactly. Yeah, if you're going to spend serious time, they're worth having and they're also great. In the garden, doing various things that you wouldn't want to do and shoes that will pick up mud, they will pick up mud on the bottom. Yes. Don't worry, I'm excited.

Heather 58:27
No, you don't wear them inside. But yeah, actually, I was gonna say too, and you know, Pacific Northwest winters in particular, I wear these when I'm out walking, or when I'm out. Trying once again to DIY the landscape, which is an endless task, but these boots make it better.

Unknown 58:40
Yeah. Yes, yeah. Okay. All right.

Heather 58:44
Let's add number three.

Unknown 58:47
ankle boots.

Bret 58:48
Mm hmm. There you are. Okay. The fourth one? Yes. So there's a kind of a category that is developing here. I think everything of our pro bono ad so far, these are a few of our favorite things, things that you our audience should know about in case you're going to be involved in any of these activities or might want to be involved in some activity you don't yet know about and so I'm going to advocate for getting involved in these bad boys here. This is a trail camera and trail cameras exist primarily I think for hunters, hunters put these up in places in order to figure out where the game is and when it's around and when it isn't around. But they are also widely use now by naturalist to figure out what the behavior patterns of animals are. And it's also tremendously fun just to figure out whether or not you're studying creatures to figure out what's available. So I will Yeah,

Heather 59:49
at tip a teeny in the Ecuadorian Amazon, where that picture that you showed of me and the ankle boots was taken. There wasn't long time Camera trap study with run by a man named Diego mascara who at that point was the field manager for the station. And with the with the help of these so called camera traps these game cameras, he found that there were I think there was primatologist already knew that there were 10 species of primates, but it was his camera trap work that revealed five different species of cats of wild cats at tip a teeny and so they're super useful as a research tool as well. Totally.

Bret 1:00:28
And yeah, I must say it is marvelously fun and addictive to deploy these things. A you learn a lot, you deploy them somewhere you think is going to be good, and it isn't. And you sort of you learn a lot about the animals just in figuring out where they're going to be things you couldn't possibly validate without the camera because the animals are really good at avoiding you in many cases. And so anyway, they're these come in different kinds. They come in a regular flash camera version that takes night photos with the flash I'd recommend against that. And then there are two versions that don't spook the animals. There's a low glow that has a light red glow animals do not see red in general Nocturnal Animals don't. And then there's a no glow pure infrared one. And anyway, they record a little SD card, whatever they see, and then you come collect the SD card. There's some fancy ones now that if you have cell service where you deploy them, they will email you images of animals that happened by which can be kind of neat. I have I've deployed a couple cameras in a local wildlife area. So the story is I was down there on my bike. And actually somebody recognized me and I was talking to them and as we were talking looking out over the Nature Reserve, there was clearly some sort of large body mammal but we didn't know what it was. And anyway, I narrowed it down it had to be one of a number of things. It had to be either otter or Beaver, or could be nutria mink. Well I was already interested. I knew there were minks in this nature area and I was interested to figure out where they were so they so much minx. Yeah, mixer always found on the shore of water. I don't know I mean, I'm sure they can swim, but I don't know that they do swim all that much, but they are closely associated with water.

Heather 1:02:16
So otter beaver or nutrient were the three most likely

Bret 1:02:19
most likely suspects in that so I went down there and started poking around a little bit at that picture of the bald eagle in flight that I showed last time was me standing there trying to get a beat on these mammals and the bald eagle flew over. And anyway, I did see the animals a second time but I couldn't figure out what they were too far off. And so I set up multiple to animals. Yeah, large bodied, dark, low. So anyway, I deployed a game camera and Zack you want to show what I came up with after about two weeks of Well, why don't you show all of it? Okay, so here's the first thing that is a beaver Can you step through the images so that is a beaver emerging from the water being filmed with infrared there you can see it's I shining back at the camera. Here's the second beaver coming out of the water. It's going to go up slope here. Alright, so beaver that's really exciting. beaver is a rodent. And it's one of my favorite rodents. Such an interesting creature. They can be very shot. Here's the second creature that the camera picked up now I think this is a muskrat and not a nutria it could be a nutria that my sense of it being a squatter than Yeah, it's a little smaller, but nutrient and muskrat. So watch this. It's going to take off into the water here.

Heather 1:03:50
Zoom. wants to gather it's almost indistinguishable. Really?

Bret 1:03:54
Yep. All right, nice. Keep going, Zach. Here's during the day, I'll look. It's a pair of river otters. So this is a nature area that is on a tributary of the Willamette River, which runs right through Portland. And so these are two river otters that presumably enter the water here and then swim right out into the Willamette and fish and maybe

Heather 1:04:21
inject a little otter fists of the boaters.

Bret 1:04:24
Probably they do. You can see it's raining as they're descending into the water. That's what I think we saw looking out at the I'm pretty sure it was going to be otters that were galumphing along, when I couldn't identify when you were talking with the guy on the one thing it was during the day and the otters here. Not I mean, and the beavers here are at least partially nocturnal, probably entirely nocturnal. And now this last one is going to be a little bit difficult to make out. But it's not a crocodile isn't No, for those of you who are photographers rule of thirds in the vertex of thirds in the lower left hand, part of The screen you've got a little four legged animal with a long tail there that is a mink so this one camera this is all from one camera it was all from one camera over

Heather 1:05:15
the course of it looks like less than a week yeah

Bret 1:05:16
in the in one go this camera caught all of these things and it's it's amazing I mean a This doesn't mean

Heather 1:05:23
to be to be fair though, you know you've got decades training, honing a natural OSI, not just as a field biologist, but also as a photographer and so you put it in the right place, right? Like you could have put it somewhere where it wouldn't have caught anything

Bret 1:05:36
I did. I've got one deployed right now that caught Absolutely not. So that's the thing that happens. And you know, anyway, it's a fun game. If you want a game that you know is very real, figuring out how to get the wildlife to show up on your game camera is is a pretty good one. And so I guess yeah, you want to show the video this is from our backyard. This is a coyote they unfortunately in Portland hunt house cats quite actively. And this is literally probably 40 feet from our back deck. Beautiful animal

Heather 1:06:18
so that's actually from last two years ago

Bret 1:06:20
yeah, that is from two years ago does a very high quality video so it does prove that you can get really good quality video and pictures off out of these things if you play some carefully and anyway, yeah, it's cool stuff.

Heather 1:06:36
So yeah, you've been getting some we've got unfortunately three Cody's right here over the last several days. Oh yeah, pictures of we

Bret 1:06:44
have been Yeah, and I will show some pictures at some point. Indeed. Actually, last week, people remember I was looking at an animal out the window that I said was very dark. I now know from multiple kinds of evidence that it had to be a coyote and my sense that it was very dark was off, everything else adds up. Maddie went to the spot and immediately picked it out and started looking around for something and now I've camera trapped around the area, the coyotes come right through there. And so that's what I saw out the window.

Heather 1:07:10
And for those of you who might be concerned are if you hear yelling, it's because our cats are pissed because they're not allowed outside. While there's this many coyotes right here are clearly waiting for them. Yeah, they're waiting for snacks.

Bret 1:07:22
But anyway, think about whether you can get these pretty cheap, you know, for 100 bucks you can you can get one that does the basics and then you know you can go up from there.

Heather 1:07:31
I we got any in particular that you recommend, because you've now got a few different types.

Bret 1:07:35
Yeah, I would say I don't, I wouldn't worry too much about no glow versus low glow, I think low glow is just fine doesn't spook the animals at all. But don't go flash, yet. Don't go with the visible flash. I would say I like the bush now cameras, get one that has a screen so you can see what the camera is going to shoot rather than being surprised when you pick up your SD card. Yeah. And it's also really useful if they have a visible LED and a setting to test where the triggers are. Oh, so basically you can set it to test and then you can walk out where you expect an animal to be if you're on a deer trail or something like that. And you can just make sure that if you walk there you see the LED go off then you know it triggers. But anyway, yeah, like the bush now ones are pretty good. And I would say you can go to trail cam pro the website. And they have very good reviews on things and you can see you know, they have all kinds of stuff that you can bolt things to trees, and they all come with a strap for a reasonably small tree, you can just strap them on to the the tree, it's easier to aim them if you have something with a little bit of a you know, tripod head versatility like that. But anyway, it's a fun game. And I'd be curious what you come up with if you if you do manage to capture something

Heather 1:09:02
beautiful. Beautiful, okay, our fifth of eight pro bono ads is for Comcast. Comcast, as many of you will know, is the largest home internet and cable TV provider in the United States. And it's the second largest broadcasting and cable TV company in the world after at&t. So, at least for our listeners and viewers in the US and many outside of the US as well. You're going to be pretty familiar with it. So what can we say that hasn't been said already? Well, Comcast has the most amazing name recognition. Really, that's that's the best I can do. Really, it's hard to avoid. If you can say one positive thing about Comcast it is that it is ubiquitous. It's everywhere. On fact, it's really hard to opt out if you want internet or cable TV, especially if you live in some places. You just you're stuck with with Comcast. They have in fact this little thing approaching what we like to call a monopoly in many places. That of course makes them less than zero. Let's talk about customer service than they might otherwise be. Why give up fuck about your customers if you have them over a barrel after all, also, now that Comcast actually owns some content, they did you know that they have bought NBC Universal. So that's part of the Comcast family now. And then they're also of course in charge of content, content distribution in the form of ISP as well, there seems to possibly be an antitrust issue there as well. And there's also the little problem of their position on net neutrality, their resistance to any but the narrowest form of it, and some evidence that they have acted really not in any way on behalf of the consumers. So all of which leaves customers of Comcast often feeling underwhelmed, at best by their service. We have a code to help you with, with your experience at Comcast, so that you might be able to get something truly special use code bend over at checkout, and receive a customer service experience that you're unlikely to ever forget.

Bret 1:11:02
So I will say Comcast may be the actual root of all evil Yeah, they just sort of function through advertising or something but we had the most spectacular run of it wasn't even bad luck. It was just Comcast

Heather 1:11:18
there was no luck involved. It was Comcast it was Comcast.

Bret 1:11:21
So what we had was a situation in our in our previous house where for years, we could not get a stable internet connection through Comcast and there was no alternative right, and those two things are undoubtedly connected. So this went on year after year, they must have come out eight times a year, always claimed to have solved that it never worked. I replaced every modem and router multiple times to make sure it wasn't something on our end it wasn't cheap, simply do not work. And then the crazy thing is we moved here there was no option for anything other than Comcast so we signed up for it and we thought maybe it's at least just our old zip code or something. The problem followed us here and indeed people who remember our early live streams we'll remember how unstable they were. Well

Heather 1:12:11
that wasn't just us

Bret 1:12:14
that lifted at the point that CenturyLink introduced fiber optic and we finally had the ability to get rid of Comcast and we got rid of them completely we don't get our television content through them

Heather 1:12:28
How much did you enjoy the phone conversation that you had with Comcast where you cut the ties

Bret 1:12:32
it was so awesome I totally if you find that you're in an abusive relationship with Comcast what you need to do is just walk away you will feel so much better when Comcast walking dollar out of your life right it's just it's it's incredible what a terrible Corporation it is and what a low quality product that delivers at such a high price

Heather 1:12:55
yeah no it's it's all of those things terrible Corporation awful product high price Yeah, what could be better get

Bret 1:13:01
yourself some book darts, some boots and a trail camera instead? You'll be happy you did

Heather 1:13:06
indeed. Okay, next ad you have called WTF See?

Bret 1:13:14
right this is my acronym for What the actual fuck Costco now mind you. I don't hate Costco. I don't love shopping there but the fact is I think there's a lot to recommend the place we do seem to source some pretty high quality stuff. The prices are good we have too much choice in general so sacrificing a bit of choice in order to get a really good price. They apparently treat their employees well they treat their employees well so it's not a general complaint about Costco at all. On the other hand, I have this experience and I can't quite get over it. So I bought a shaver now the reason I bought the shaver was that my last shaver which was actually Okay, was a Philips shaver that had one defect that was an absolute killer. The defect was that they had the button was a big lever on the front of the thing and there was no way to pack it into any item, any luggage. There was nothing you could do to prevent it from turning on in the luggage.

Heather 1:14:20
Anytime you checked your bag at the point your bag came off the plane into the rotating carousel, whatever. It's been so long since we've learned and remember, your bag would be humming Yeah, it

Bret 1:14:32
was crazy. It even happened once in the overhead compact I think the turbulence that we've been up to anyway, I needed a new shaver and so I looked at this one and then had all sorts of cool stuff, some of which I didn't exactly need, but okay, you know, I'm not planning to do a lot of manscaping you know, I mean, it's just, but

Heather 1:14:50
wait, did you see an advertisement for this and one of the many men's magazines you read?

Bret 1:14:54
Ah, no, I can't see it in any of the men's magazines. I don't read all of them. Yes, but here's the thing. Okay, so I got it home, and I was pretty excited to open it up. And this is the box for the actual product. It's only this big. Now, What the actual fuck causes you to disguise this in this clip because this may strike. Like that's insane, right? Right

Heather 1:15:23
for those listening that's close to two thirds of the box that has nothing in it.

Bret 1:15:28
Yeah, it has nothing in it and it's actually made of stuff right now I live on this planet my children live on this planet. I don't want to see it liquidated any faster than necessary, right? And I'm forced to ask all kinds of questions that they ship it like this from China, or did they erect this box here? It just doesn't make any sense. And it's not like this is particularly stealable I don't think that's it. I think it's one of these considerations like bigger was better spent longer there's more stuff in there or it takes up more real estate on the thing and catches your attention. I don't know what the hell explains it. But please fucking stop. The extra packaging is killing us and I if I can just extend this to other places like apple, right? Okay, this gorgeous packaging that everything comes in the stuff that's too good to throw away. So you fill your attic with boxes? Oh, what if I sell the machine? I need the box? You know, I mean, come on. The fact is we have an environmental read, right? We don't need that. And just as we should penalize advertisers who advertise at us without informing us they're manipulating us we should penalize them. We should penalize entities that sell us more packaging than is necessary. I don't want the stuff packaged in such a flimsy way that it's broken when I get it that's also bad for the planet. But for God's sake Can you just make it simple right simple packaging recyclable packaging that's what we want ramped over now

Heather 1:16:58
it's excellent okay two more ads in this in this pro bono ad edition of darker isn't and certainly we didn't say that we are going to as as we are beginning to advertise actual things for which we're being paid we are going to continue to do these pro bono ads for things that we that we find that we feel like

Bret 1:17:16
and I should say we don't do this one thing but people are free to send us products that they want us to advertise if you send us something really bad we may do a pro bono ad about the bad product so be warned. only send us stuff you believe in. Excellent.

Heather 1:17:34
Okay, so this next one is is a mishmash it's basically an advertisement for artisans, artisans of all sorts, artisans and craftsmen. And you know we have received some amazing gifts we you know I we are both to some degree artisans and craftspeople ourselves, but we have also received some remarkable things since we have been doing Dark Horse and and before and I just wanted to highlight a few of those things and encourage everyone if you have any interest whether or not you think you have any ability to to find a craft find something over an arts or crafts space that you can you can start to do. So one is this this ceramicist Matthew Kelly so Zack you can show my screen here. This is his site. He makes beautiful things he does among several different kinds of firings. And this if I forgot to look it up this mug that I'm holding is from his salt kiln that I think he built truly truly gorgeous work. We also have we were sent so Zack you can take take that down now. I forgot to look into it but this beautiful little leather case with these leather Dark Horse coasters. Totally go out to the coast love the coasters we use them all the time you probably because of the way our our cameras are aimed at the moment you can't see that our stuff is sitting on these coasters.

Bret 1:19:14
I thought they were gonna stain

Heather 1:19:15
they don't stay don't stay in and actually the time sorry I didn't look back at the guy who sent them to a set I don't know if they'll work as coasters I just work in leather and I thought I'd make these for you they weren't grateful. This incidentally these glasses that you send them see is drinking from are not a gift to us because of what we do here. These are things we found at the farmers market in Ashland, Oregon a couple of years ago made you know bought from the glass worker who actually made them Zach Do you want to show the the picture that I sent you of the horse and I'm going to quickly look on my phone to see if I got I am not positive who is The artist is I'm really sorry about that but when we find out we'll put it in the show notes. These people sent us this gorgeous piece of arts woodburned and they have their names on the back of it but we hung it on a wall and it didn't easily come off the wall so that's why I'm not using their names here. We have next item this Zachary giant herbs and tea here in Portland, Oregon. The guy behind this is an herbalist and and also now tea maker who who has is doing a tremendous amount with sort of traditional medicine and tinctures and stuff and he sent us a box of chives and tinctures and we have enjoyed all of them that we've tried so far, but I just wanted to highlight two of those an

Bret 1:20:52
herbalist and P wizard. I can tell you from having drunk beasties, they're really great.

Heather 1:20:57
They're amazing. So here we have a kitchen not dark horse horse, h o AR se Chai, onto which he's written, this logical blend will make you want to analyze its components. Why does this taste so good? And on the back a unity of flavors without any hint of evergreen, perfect during a long day of voicework sit back and grok this Chai while discussing a heterodox opinion or reminding people where you really stand this Chinese and olfactory wake up call so that's awesome. And little bit disappointingly maybe maybe my favorite what he said is like 12 or 14 of these, but maybe my favorite child of his that I've had so far is anti fatigue. It's an Tifa Chai. And on it he's written there are no leaders here but its flavor shows up and burns on the way down the dash of horseradish to make the ice water to Portland paprika to warm you up and accent of Karana to keep the mind alert, a great drink to get you amped before your soccer match. So these are great I recommend all of all of his all of his work and then just one more artisan particularly all artisans everywhere, but our friend Dave Stevens who many have remarked on the knife on in the back corner in the sink is a metalsmith and he made he made me a shame swordsmith is a sword Smith and he made me this machete so I also in addition to ankle boots depending on where I am will also sometimes carry a machete when I'm in the field usually not you know not at tip a teeny it's not necessary but I have been in places where I needed it both for vines and for protection. Not against snakes but against drug runners actually that's another story but this is gorgeous This is so I can see the pattern well Jess Yeah, nope now I'm in a different camera so I'm sure Dave's watching is like show it a different way What are you doing Heather? Anyway this is gorgeous and he also made for you

Bret 1:23:01
this is a this is a historical sword from his shop Okay, I want to remove it without cutting myself yeah indeed all right here throw that suit into the air

Heather 1:23:13
yeah

Bret 1:23:14
yeah so you know here's the thing this is historically just this is historical from his I think his first real sword It comes with a story which I will not butcher by attempting to tell it here but anyway, just because some watery tart through a sword at you is no basis for a system of government However, a sword like this is one you can be truly truly proud of. And it does have some basis in history. But anyway maybe I will solicit a copy of the story and posted for people beautiful

Heather 1:23:49
you know in objection to Monty Python which I rarely do I feel like Arthur and Camelot are actually a pretty damn good system out last night

Bret 1:23:59
yeah it definitely had its advantages yeah

Heather 1:24:03
yeah so don't slice off yeah anything important

Bret 1:24:06
side I'm also not gonna trip on it after the podcast yeah please walk over there please

Heather 1:24:12
don't alright so artisans of all sorts including all of these all of these people and and and many more. Okay, last free ad

Bret 1:24:22
All right, last for Yeah, this is a this is a weird one. So you know, buckle up. So here's the thing, okay. Really good tools are important and sometimes really good tools can get lost in the shuffle. Now I'm glad this tool is still available when I first encountered it. I wasn't exactly sure what its point was and it didn't really explain itself on the packaging you had to play with visible you have to show it figure out what it is. So what this is,

Heather 1:24:50
is a obscuring the vise grip part a crescent wrench

Bret 1:24:54
with vise grip action, right now. Here's the thing. crescent wrench that is adjustable is a useful thing because you can set it to whatever size not you need to put the thing on. But it has a defect built into it, which is that when you put it on to something with flats like this, it has slack in it. And so it tends to mar the nut and it doesn't hold on very much it can slip off. And so the thing about this is by adding the vise grip action, this isn't the vise grip at all. What it does is it holds them that with no slack, and it's reversible, you just hit that little lever and it pops off. And so the thing is, if you have used a tool like an adjustable crescent wrench a million times you know this defect and you don't realize that the solution looks like this and that it works as well as it does. In fact, I have two of these, sometimes you have two things. And they're pointed in two different directions. This also you know, it holds on. So there are lots of places where you want that ability to clamp. And anyway, if you need one of these, I would get them they're cheap, and they're well worth having in your shop. And

Heather 1:26:07
like with normal Crescent wrenches, they come in different sizes. And I will say just watching you handle it. The smaller one is better suited to my hands. I don't think I'm not particularly smaller, particularly small hands, but they but there is actually a smaller size of this vise grip action crescent wrench that isn't useful for everything that the larger one has. But it fits. It fits other bodies. Yeah,

Bret 1:26:32
well. I'm not sure the small one still exists in the market. Oh, that's too bad. I think this one might be the only one available. There is another tool that we have two different sizes of which is very useful in that way. But the thing about this is this problem has been addressed many, many times, and almost all of the solutions are bad, right? So there are lots of different adjustable Crescent wrenches. There's one with a slide here, that's particularly terrible. Right? None of them really work. But this one just happens to cut the Gordian knot by using vise grip action for something that, you know, this doesn't work as a vise grip, right? It's not its purpose. But anyway, it's it's cool that it was solved. And I'm always disturbed that people don't know about it. Because hanging there at the hardware store, it doesn't immediately leap to mind what problem it's solving, right? It's not obvious what it's for. So anyway, think about whether you need a couple of those. So

Heather 1:27:36
in conclusion, we are today advocating for depending on who you are the use of book darts, extent dinosaur stores, Eagle boots, trail cameras, artisans of all sorts and adjustable Crescent wrenches with vise grip locking and we ask you to be very cautious when engaging Comcast and the packaging associated with Costco otherwise known as What the actual fuck Costco,

Unknown 1:28:06
right, yeah,

Heather 1:28:08
yeah. Are we Oh, do we have a thumbnail for this week? we probably don't yet.

Bret 1:28:13
And that could be the hummingbird picture. I don't know. extent dinosaur

Heather 1:28:20
like Stan dinosaur indeed. All right. So are we they're gonna do our announcements. And I think we're there. All right, so we will as usual, take a 15 minute break and then be back with a live Q and A answering questions you have posed during the Super Chat. A reminder, as I said, at the top of the hour this Monday at 5pm Pacific, we're going to have a patron only test of our new Super Chat system, in which we will be I think, looking at the live chat and answering questions that we decide in advance if we're going to give you bad answers to good questions or good answers to bad questions or some combination which should be fun, just very brief. If you have other if you're not interested in that you may be interested in the once a month private q&a at my Patreon. Join join us there at my Heather Hines Patreon or Brett's Patreon where he has two long conversations every month. Usually the first Saturday and Sunday of the month this month. Not so much because it's Easter but because it's our younger son Toby's birthday. We have delayed tomorrow's for a week.

Bret 1:29:21
So if you are part of that conversation, it will be delayed a week we will do it next Sunday.

Heather 1:29:27
And as usual, any questions you can direct to dark horse that moderator@gmail.com we've got some some stuff for sale a dub dub dub dot stored at Dark Horse podcast.org and our clips channel continues to put out good good

Bret 1:29:45
clips. Yeah, spread the word counteract YouTube's desire to disappear us spread

Heather 1:29:51
the word, like the video, and we will see you next week.

Bret 1:29:57
All right, be well, everyone

This transcript was generated by https://otter.ai