Bret 0:10
Hey folks, welcome to the Dark Horse podcast live streaming from Portland. Why? Because that's where we live stream from this is number 77. In our series of live streams, I'm here of course with Dr. Heather hiring

Heather 0:23
our seventh palindromic Episode Seven,

Bret 0:27
I had not put that together yet, which will not surprise you at all. But now that you say it sure, 77

Heather 0:33
Yeah. So today, we do not have any ads today. We have a few announcements, we're going to talk about where we're going, and then we'll, we'll launch into it. We talked a little bit about the Shogun verdict, continue to talk about what's going on in Portland, a bit about journalism. A little, little story on some new proposed paid leave for employees that I have not shared with you. But you will be you will be impressed by the audacity shocked and amazed maybe shocked and amazed. Yes. But But first. And I also want to begin with just a small personal announcement before we before we move in. But first, tomorrow is the monthly private q&a at my Patreon, please consider joining us there it's every month to our q&a from 11am to 1pm. Pacific, and we have a lot of fun with him. And it's it's a small enough group that joins us live, we leave them up for anyone who's on the Patreon to watch later. But it's a small enough group that we can actually monitor the chat live and interact with it and do a little bit of follow up in a way that you know, we don't even we don't look at the chat for these. So we encourage you to join us to join us there. And I guess before we see you again, I believe next week, you will have had your first Patreon conversation of the month as well, next Saturday, which is the which one is your Saturday

Bret 2:05
conversation on Saturday conversation is the coalition of the reasonable.

Heather 2:08
And how reasonable in fact is that coalition? shockingly. So

Bret 2:12
yeah, I'm not all that shocked, actually a very non random sample of highly reasonable people. Exactly, I

Heather 2:18
find almost everyone that we hear from and who is choosing to engage with us, either in a position to support us financially or not, is shockingly reasonable. And I guess I'm less than less shocked by that. As as time goes on, I guess it's just the disconnect between that. And what we are told everyone sounds like in the rest of the world.

Bret 2:43
Yeah, it's one of the hopeful facts that were we to be able to convey it to people that showing up in the world in a particular way results in the world and teeing up and delivering interaction after interaction that is highly reasonable. If people understood what they were missing, and that small amount of faith as it were in treating people well, and doing a thorough analysis and not listening too much. To to the haters, results in a community emerging that is high quality. Yeah, people would, would be more inclined to behave that way. It's like

Heather 3:24
believing that beyond the event horizon of hot, fast dopamine hits, there's actually something better and more more wonderful, then then the heat and anger.

Bret 3:37
Yeah. And in fact, it's a little bit like every addiction that people have, where something that delivers on the short term is blocking them from something much better on the long term. And the problem is, it's just very hard to look past the immediate.

Heather 3:54
Yeah, that's right. So I lost a friend this week. And I'm not going to name him now. And we're not going to talk about him much. We may come back, I may come back to this. I may speak about him later, he asked that no public commemorations take place, but I am not certain that I need to honor those wishes of his because I know this will be difficult for for many people to hear, but because he took his own life. And a family member of his shared a note that he had left for me in which he said that he hoped that I understand. And I don't it's it's not that this came as a complete surprise. So I had talked to him over the years and I had asked him over and over again, that if he was thinking this to come to me, he knew I would not understand and I don't, I'm heartbroken and I'm also angry. No good comes of such things. And I was then I moved to tears actually, when someone anonymous to me on twitter said in response to your announcement of your and geerts podcast, that you and I and Douglas Murray, quote, are significant reasons why I am still alive after this crazy year. So I am, in this week in particular, just particularly grateful for that sentiment to becoming to be coming my way and to feel that we can do good, even while something this, even things we desperately want not to be true are out of our control. So I wanted to share that because I am in a different mind frame, obviously than I normally AM. And largely, Brett is going to be on lead here today.

Bret 5:44
Yes, we will see how that goes, given my certain deficit of skills in the area of executive function and leading But anyway, yeah, it's a terrible turn of events. I know that you did our friend a tremendous amount of good obviously, in the end, things went the way they did. But I also will just say, if we do decide to return to this, that there's a tough point that I think people miss, which is that the commemorative ceremonies that follow a death, especially one like this are really about living in the living are more or less entitled to navigate as makes sense. So while I think it is important to try to honor people's wishes, when they leave the world, those wishes are not the only thing that matters, right? People exist in a in a social context. And those of us who go on have to be able to figure out how to grapple with things. And to the extent that someone's wishes are an obstacle to that, because they were very focused on their own situation. I think, you know, we have to be careful, but there's a certain amount of license to navigate as needed. And frankly, I think, in the question of this particular person who was very thoughtful and and insightful, they would also understand, were they able to see it clearly?

Heather 7:21
Yeah, I think so. And I guess just one more thing, in light of that, for this episode I have put behind us. For that, for getting instructions from our producer. For this episode, I've just put behind us, one of the belt replicas that he had given to our younger son. So that's, that's behind us today as a as a minor physical commemoration now.

Bret 7:50
Alright, so I think the first thing we're going to talk about is the Philbin verdict. And I don't want to delve too deeply into the particulars. Frankly, I think many people were absolutely glued to their screens, looking at the details of the trial as they unfolded. And obviously, people were tied up in, in many cases in rooting one way or the other for a verdict. But what I do want to talk about is the implications of what happened. That is to say, we have a conviction on three counts that followed very short jury deliberation in which they apparently asked no questions. And in a wider context, that was frankly, bizarre and quite jarring in which maxine waters and the president both appeared to urge the jury toward a particular conclusion. And what I want to highlight is that this was exactly the fear that I expressed on Joe Rogan last year. My concern was that we obviously have a very dangerous and volatile situation where we've had violent riots in the case of Portland, we've had them for months on end on a nightly basis, ostensibly tied to this verdict in our to this situation and what it reveals. And the problem is that we obviously had the danger of renewed violence, we're the verdict to have been not guilty. On the other hand, we have a standard in this country of reasonable doubt we have the burden on the state to prove its case and the facts of this case, were highly complex in effect, the state needed to prove that a reasonable officer knowing what Philbin knew would not have acted as Shogun did. They also needed to prove that George Floyd didn't die from other conditions that just happened to occur during the progress of this complex arrest. And in both cases, there are tremendous reasons for doubt. So, in any case, without focusing too much on the details, the question is this. Did this jury conclude what it concluded because of what was presented in court? And because the arguments were persuasive where they needed to be? Or did it conclude that for other reasons, such as a belief that some larger sort of justice required this answer, which, frankly, in the context of a sitting president, urging a jury towards an apparent verdict, and a member of congress doing the same, this is very, very frightening? And for those who haven't thought deeply about it, the the issue in question is this. The founders of the country, created an environment in which the state had a tremendous burden that it needed to overcome in court for a reason, because the danger of the state, not meeting such a burden, left the state in an asymmetrically powerful position. So in other words, it's not that the founders weren't aware that a preponderance of the evidence meaning the evidence said more this than that was available, because of course, that's what we have in civil trials. But in criminal trials, they wanted to hobble the state, and ensure that the state had to prove something beyond a reasonable doubt in order to protect the rest of us from the state. Now, in this case, we have another factor, which is effectively, mobs engaged in violence demanding an outcome. And we have the state appearing to be persuaded by those mobs such that the executive saw fit to intervene in the decision making process of jurors. So

Bret 12:19
whether or not Shogun is actually guilty. He's obviously been convicted. So in a technical sense, he is guilty, whether he was actually guilty, and it was proven beyond a reasonable doubt in court in this venue, is another question. But the hazard of allowing a situation in which public violence persuades the state to put its thumb on the scales of a trial, a criminal trial, the danger of that is impossibly great. And what is absolutely shocking to me is that people do not seem to understand that the the burden of the state to prove guilt beyond a reasonable doubt, to a jury of one's peers. That is the thing that protects us, this isn't about show and this is about 350 million of us who are protected from the state's aggression by that counter intuitive innovation. And my concern is that we are uninvented it.

Heather 13:26
I'm sorry, I lost you at the end, which counterintuitive. So I was gonna make a point and I lost your logic at the very end.

Bret 13:34
Sorry about that. My point is the idea that the state should have to prove beyond a reasonable doubt is counterintuitive. Right? One would expect that the state would just have to prove that your guilt is more likely than not well.

Heather 13:48
So this this, this actually reminds me of what I was talking about two episodes ago with regard to type one and type two errors with regard to medical and surgical interventions for children who declared themselves trans Yeah, right. Which kind of error do we do we prefer to we prefer to make false positives? And in the case of, of, of criminal cases, it's, you know, do we do we prefer to falsely convict those who are innocent? Or do we prefer to falsely lead off those who are actually guilty? And what the founders of this country decided is that we absolutely 100% prefer to let off some people who are guilty rather than ever put, rather than ever put an innocent person behind bars?

Bret 14:35
Yes, exactly they did. It is before those terms before those statistical terms ever existed. They made quite clear their logic. And the idea was to prevent the tyranny of the state which they were, of course, keenly aware of in light of what they had experienced with Great Britain. The twist here is that we now have the danger of the tyranny of the state under the control of the mob. Right. And that is a truly frightening prospect that in effect, what we, to the extent that this was not the correct verdict, that there was reasonable doubt on the basis that, for example,

Heather 15:15
and just to be clear, now you've said it, but when you say that this verdict may not have been correct, you are not actually saying anything about whether or not Chevron was, is actually guilty. You are saying that the evidence provided in the case does not appear to meet the standard. Right. And it is almost you may also be making that other point. But that is not that it's not certainly not

Bret 15:37
trying to make that point, what I'm trying, the point I'm trying to make is that, for example, we had evidence in the case of George Floyd having ingested substantial quantities of drugs, that would have put him in jeopardy. In light of his heart condition, they might have put him in jeopardy, absent a heart condition, but he clearly had a heart condition. He had had COVID and was therefore compromised. And he was under he was being arrested, and he was clearly panicking, which elevated his heart rate. And so the question of whether or not he died as a result of what Philbin did, or whether or not he died as a result of the situation, triggering a heart condition to cause his heart to fail, is one in which it is hard to imagine how a jury of reasonable people would not have had at least some reasonable doubt about that question. So in light of the fact that so

Heather 16:31
the question to be asked is what other forces were in play?

Bret 16:35
Right? What other forces were in play? And in fact, and one

Heather 16:38
of the forces is blatantly obvious, which is the threat of them up,

Bret 16:42
the threat damage, the threat of the mob or the desire to do some kind of justice above and beyond what the jury's job was supposed to say? But the problem is, you cannot sacrifice an individual. You can't say well, Shelvin is one man, and, you know, riotous mobs could kill 10s or hundreds, we can't do that calculation, we cannot allow ourselves to do that calculation, because it isn't the 10 or 100 people who might be injured or killed in rioting, that it's up against, it's up against the protection of the 350 million of us who are, who are insulated from governmental tyranny there and by this principle, and so, you know, in essence, as counterintuitive as it is, that principle must stand irrespective of the cost of doing the right and legal thing in court. So, you know, it was clear this was coming. This is why I said it on Joe Rogan. And I must say it was one of the most uncomfortable things I've ever said in my life in the, you know, in the unfolding emergence of the facts of this case to say, actually, you know, as everybody was saying, This is clearly murder. And I was saying it's not so clearly murder, this was complex, what you need is a court and I'm concerned that a court will not be able to do its job in this case, because of the larger threat of what will happen if it does.

Heather 18:09
And also, what you need as a court is not a statement that is partisan. It's not a political statement. It is a statement for democracy, regardless of where you stand left, right? Democrat, Republican, what you need is a court in order to make such decisions. This actually what stands between us in anarchy,

Bret 18:30
anarchy and tyranny. And in this case, we may have both right, conspiring together and you know, yes, it is it is the it is absolutely on partisan. In fact, the thing that keeps ringing in my ear is the rauzein veil of ignorance, right? The reason that you protect this standard, even when it will free some guilty people, right, the reason that you protect this standard is because of the justifiable fear that we should all have of a government that isn't held to the standard. Yeah, right. And, you know, you don't know when it's going to be on your side versus on your enemy side.

Heather 19:08
And so the point is always the error of these partisan moves, isn't it? It's

Bret 19:11
always the air. And you know, as we watch the, the educational apparatus that is supposed to be upgrading all of our software, come apart and engage in these petty games. I am, in my mind constantly building a list of things that a proper curriculum should expose every single person to as we've been doing for decades, right? Exactly, you know, you just built a list of what should be and one of the things is rawlsian veil of ignorance, you know, you need 45 minutes and spell it out. The rauzein veil of ignorance just essentially says you shouldn't make rules that you wouldn't want to live on the wrong side of right. You don't want to make a rule that you shouldn't be happy to face. And so that puts a limit on the kinds of rules you create, and it frankly sidelines most of this partisan garbage Because you may get an advantage from doing it on Wednesday, and then on Friday, you suffer the cost of it and right, we don't want to live in that world, right? We don't want, you know, to, for example, start increasing the number of people on the court to compensate for what the last administration did, because the point is, then the next administration will do it to you. And what you'll have is a,

Heather 20:22
you know, girl supreme court justices now,

Bret 20:23
right, we're also Right, exactly.

Heather 20:27
That's the natural end point of that game.

Bret 20:29
It is it is because in effect, it's just it's a it's a race to the bottom that all the smart people know, you don't want to trigger, right. So in any case, I'm not sure where to go beyond that, except to say that I think everyone who did watch this trial, if you paid any attention at all, you saw reasonable doubt, right? It doesn't mean that you think that he wasn't in the end, responsible for George Floyd's death, though you're a reasonable person could imagine easily that he wasn't that George Floyd had a heart attack as a result of an elevated heart rate and drugs that he had taken and that he died under children's need for endogenous reasons rather than rather than exogenous ones. But that isn't the point. The jury is instructed very specifically, that the state must prove its case beyond a reasonable doubt. And they are supposed to exclude the consequences of saying one way or the other. Whether or not the state met that burden.

Heather 21:34
Very good. How about that? Not just the way that I acknowledge that your fist

Bret 21:44
is very good that we have arrived at this moment, something,

Heather 21:47
something like that in this conversation anyway. Yep. Okay, we want to talk a little bit about Portland. Is that right one? Yeah. So I've got a number of photographs that I want to show. But after we have a few videos, short videos, from our current mayor, Ted Wheeler, here in Portland, I don't know, maybe you introduce that, or we can just launch into the videos. Well, I

Bret 22:13
mean, let's say Ted Wheeler has now been trending on Twitter. always interesting. When Ted Wheeler is trending on Twitter. He's trending on Twitter. And this time, you know, I always click with some trepidation, when to write, and in this case, I was actually quite surprised and relieved to find that, in effect, what he has finally said, and as you pointed out in our conversation earlier, it's not the first time he said something like this, but he has said it and then reneged on it, and in this case, maybe maybe he's finally grown aware, but what he's effectively said is that Portland has a serious problem with anarchists that these are law breakers who must be arrested and that is something that he has been very, very timid about. And so he has extended a state of emergency through the weekend, and he has instructed the police and I should point out that we're going to show the videos or Yeah, I think we should I think we should show the videos. I should point out that in Portland we have the odd fact of our mayor also being our police commissioner, which means that what he says about what the police should do carries more weight than it might in some other city. So all right, Zach, do you want to show the fur

Heather 23:42
they're not they're not the same video they're two different videos do you want to show both of them or

Bret 23:46
do you want just the one out the one that you sent back? Okay, so

Heather 23:49
in so hold on just a second sec then in a slightly longer video from coin six which is a local CBS affiliate I think it's CBS CBS the one with the I guess I honestly I went to their site. I was like, I think this is CBS is like what there's nothing on the site that says CBS anywhere like they just assume we know that that crazy scary looking is CBS. Anyway, that's a different, different topic. But one of the newscasters says with regard to an Tifa, or the anarchists I'm not even sure who now is claiming to be doing these things. They keep on making these, these announcements in advance, they're gonna do these direct actions, right? And so the newscaster says in the past, events, builders, direct action have ended with violence and destruction. So that's now showing up on the news. Yep, that is now showing up in the news. Finally, and now we have this shorter videos act that one minute, four seconds or so.

Unknown 24:44
And I've extended the state of emergency through the weekend. Our job is to unmask them, arrest him and prosecute them. I want to personally thank neighbors family, friends and others who Come forward with vital evidence. People know who these criminals are. They know what they're up to. If you have any information, please contact the police. Acting Chief Davis will provide specific shortly. I also want you to know that these people often arrive at their so called direct actions in cars. And they're all dressed in all black. If you see this, call the police. If you can provide a license plate, if you can do so safely, that information can help later. Together, we can make a stamp. We're doing what we can today. I'm also asking for your help to make this stand and take our city back. Thank you.

Bret 25:51
Okay, so let's, first of all, I just want to address the elephant in the room as it were. Actually that may turn out to be a better metaphor in this case, then than I had anticipated, but shared sign donkey, it is the elephant in the room in this case. So I do not know whether or not we are having an impact on for example, Ted wheelers understanding of what's going on. I do know that this week I had a piece in on Hurd, which is a British publication on what's going on in Portland and of the absurd fact of local businesses, putting signage in their window, which you have called don't hurt me walls that appear to attempt to usher vandals on to harm someone else, right? obvious game theoretic hazard of the civilian authority, not only taking no stand, but hobbling the police in the enforcement of the law. I do think that there is a strong chance we are constantly facing calls that we, you know, admit that the conservatives are right, that we acknowledge that we are conservatives or something like this. And I think this, we've never done this because we're not conservatives. And while the conservatives are in many cases, defending principles that are traditionally liberal in this case, where liberals have abandoned them, the fact of those principles having been innovated by liberals is an important part of the story. In any case, I just want to say, we don't know whether we're having an effect, but I think it is very important and likely to be having an effect that people who are local to Portland, who are not interested in mocking it as a terrible place. And people who are not interested in mocking liberalism itself are saying, hey, actually, this is an untenable situation. And that the The fact is, the violence itself has adjusted what people acknowledge you and I meet people all the time who say very standard things about their belief until we say non standard things at which point we get confessions about what they actually think, right and Portland. Yeah, you're in Portland. And so no doubt Mayor Wheeler is getting some of the same

Heather 28:22
people show up in our email and comments and such as well from Portland. Ryan, thank you for saying for, for saying things that sound like the conversations happening within my home.

Bret 28:32
And so the mayor is surely not getting a proper representation of what the citizens of his city actually believe in want because everybody is so busy saying things designed to get the mob to move on to someone else, that you get the wrong idea, you get the idea that Portland is much more supportive of the violence than it actually is. And so what I'm hoping is that the ability that our position as as unapologetic liberals who believe that coddling these violent anarchists is a terrible terrible mistake and say so repeatedly that that is actually finally getting through and that in part what may have happened here is that the mayor may be realizing that there is more support for him doing the right thing than he has understood and while I'm very angry at all of the violence that has happened up till now, if he has finally understood this and he's going to stick to enforcing the law equally against all law breakers then you know thank goodness and maybe you know, maybe we've hit bottom

Heather 29:45
Yeah, well, it's always a dangerous thing to imagine. I don't know if since we can ever hear the videos at play a much that it was clear hopefully to those just listening to that was in fact, Ted Wheeler talking at a press conference about Saying specifically that our job is to unmask them, arrest them and prosecute them, which is the strongest words that he's used. And I took a walk around in northwest neighborhood yesterday, not the pearl district adjacent to the pearl district. Although a neighborhood in which there has been a lot of damage as well, you know, to the point that you know, some people are still saying, as I understand it, there's you know, the damage has been limited to one square block, like, you know, well, for a while and this last summer, they were certainly focusing on the federal building. But it was never restricted to that. And it certainly expanded its scope quite a lot to a few regular regular places in our regular neighborhoods. But my sense yesterday, walking around, is it the facade on the street is now is now cracking as well that there were far fewer don't hurt me walls, in on businesses. There. Yeah, there's a little bit of signage still up the occasional occasional blacklivesmatter. Sign and such. But none of these arrays of don't hurt me walls, which have become the norm, which quickly became the norm As of early last summer. And what I do see is more indications of fatigue, and questioning. And then these outposts and individual homes really have of signage and so I just took some photos and bring them walk through them and talk about them. So Zach, don't put my screen up just yet until I find these. And okay, so you can put my screen up now, Zack. And for those of you who are on Twitter, I I felt obligated to let Paul Krugman have it on Twitter yesterday, because he claimed that it was basically a GOP fever dream that anything that was happening in cities that was untoward, over the last 10 months. And so as part of the thread that I wrote in response to him yesterday, I put a couple of these images up. So some of you will be familiar with these already. So this is just a sticker on I don't even remember what some something in a neighborhood near downtown Portland says new Portland sucks. Now this could be I could imagine the person who put this up meant one of two really different things, right? They could be part of the sort of anarchist or woke or you know, any number of groups over in that space, who want you know, more chaos and less law and order and more fear among ordinary citizens and such. Or it could mean it could be the same sense that I have you know, we're newcomers to Portland, we've only been here for two and a half years. But actually, as I said, in that tweet thread, yeah, this this new Portland does suck and the New Democratic Party sucks and this new national conversation and the new national culture that are becoming reified suck and we can all do better and we all deserve better. Anything you want to add to that?

Bret 32:59
Yeah, I mean, I do think it's these structures and they urge us on to behavior that is itself appalling. But I agree it's not us who sucks it's these structures, you know, a corrupt democratic party that wants to cynically ride a woke wave, for example, leaves those of us who, you know, would ordinarily find a home in the Democratic Party absolutely homeless. So, you know that that is just a simple fact and I think increasingly the failure of these institutions for a several different reasons some of them economics, some of them you know, the political corruption and other such phenomena that that leaves us to erect alternatives right there really is only one or maybe two choices you could recapture these things, which turns out to be very very difficult for obvious reasons, or you could build around them and I agree I've also noticed I hadn't I think said anything about it, but there is a an almost searching for new ways of shaping the conversations there's been a mind numbing chorus of you know, Black Lives Matter, for example. And then there has been the sort of people trying to figure out how to signal Yes, I'm in principle on board with the idea of black lives matter but I'm not on board with the idea of you know, violent riots or all white people are racist or any of those things. So I don't know maybe maybe you want to show your your next image.

Heather 34:48
Yeah, so I mean, this this is this speaks to exactly the searching that you are, you're talking about that increasingly, you know, the graffiti, the tags that we're seeing as of last summer, through the Winter through you know, the first part of the spring really were entirely singled out. It was just this monotone in support of what turns out to be a divisive, hateful series of actions. And now we are seeing things like Who are we right and then no ever same neighborhood I happen to walk by a first floor or ground floor apartment with a whole lot of stuff in the window. So here's here's one of the windows at some distance with for those who are just listening rather than watching I'll show close ups of three of these but several several of the signs that we have come accustomed to plus a whole lot of Hello Kitty figurines which struck me as something I hadn't seen before super ominous. I mean you joke ish, but I have been talking with some people elsewhere, behind the scenes about the connections between some of what we're seeing in some of these subcultures including anime and the rise of some of this very very physically disconnected social constructionist thinking so I'm not sure there isn't an important connection here

Bret 36:14
no I was only partially being ironic Hello Kitty in some sense I think because it is like you know designed to be the opposite of threatening is actually a very good cloak for some other stuff and I've also seen it used as sheep's clothing more or less

Heather 36:34
yeah so here we have a close up of one of the one of the things in the window white apathy, fragility ignorance and silence feeds into violence systems of oppression so I'm just showing these I mean this was interesting because there's literally a crack in the window in front of this and it feels like this kind of you must this kind of message which for months and months and months in Portland and to some degree nationwide and to some degree internationally was the only note that we were allowed to publicly agreed to if we if we want it to be accepted in polite company or something and having literally the crack in the window in front of this seems like a hopeful metaphor maybe here we have this hand drawn picture of Hello Kitty literally saying Black Lives Matter and then I don't know what the thing in the puddle next to Hello Kitty is but it's dream thinking abolish the police. So I really don't know what's going on here. Another crack in front of it and then then this defund the police with a cartoon image of a pig in military and police garb saying just following orders and you know there's no he's crushing BLM protesters underneath his giant piggy police feet and says a cab at the bottom all all cops are bastards so you know this the same the same rhetoric right? But again, this is one apartment that I'm seeing this sense so let's just run through this before we before you want to riff on the next window over same apartment I think we have defund the police share the bacon, queer power, Black Power, women power, all power to the people and then protect black trans lives. Here's a close up of that one. Just notable here you know, black trans lives matter we spent some time talking about what what the heck is trans doing and Black Lives Matter all of a sudden, last summer but I believe and I didn't actually spend as much time with this as I was hoping to that there's literally one trans man on here and the rest are trans women and that's of course consistent with the idea that this that a lot of the politicking behind raising the raising the the rights and visibility of trans people is actually specifically about men who are declaring themselves women and very little in the opposite direction and there's something very important and deep there I'm not going to go there right now. defund and demilitarize and dismantle police in case anyone was still confused about whether or not defund actually means these other things at least in some people's heads. Yes it actually 100% does again with some weird little like Hello Kitty ish characters around the outside as if to make this seem like it's all sunshine and flowers messaging. And finally, sort of shades of Audrey Lord here dismantle our house, build the new they do they want to dismantle what they're viewing as our house and they say they want to build the new but I've literally never heard a policy proposal to that end. I've never heard even a sentence to that and what will the new look like there's the it's you know, they're busy declaring themselves on governable and And they'll be satisfied with nothing. There were there were violent protests the night that Biden was elected the night of the Shogun verdict, you know, no outcome well suffice.

Bret 40:11
Yeah, I mean, it's almost as bad as it is that there's not a single idea on the table. That is credible. It's even worse than that. Because what is said, clearly tells us that the people who are so confidently telling us what we have to do to fix civilization, either can't or won't think. Right. So for example, the idea that we shouldn't call the police when one teenagers about to stab another, because teenagers have been fighting with knives for you know, forever. And I'm not even sure what the conclusion of that idea is supposed to be. Is it okay, that they've been fighting with knives is, you know, how true is that? Doesn't any reasonable situation prevent teenagers from fighting with? I mean, it just, it's nonsense. Yeah, it's nonsense. But you know, let us just say, again, I'm worried about the, the death of the counter intuitive, right? So we've talked a lot across heterodox circles about the importance of nuance. And this is really another facet of that same gem, which is the things that make the West great, right, to the extent that they're intuitive, they don't require a comment, and everybody else has them as well, to the extent that they are counter intuitive, then we have to hold not only the thing itself, but the explanation for why that thing works, right. And so here you have a bunch of people engaging in another counter intuitive, right? The right to say anything, right. And I would protect their right to say anything up to the point where they are calling for, you know, the death of Andy No, or the murder of police. And frankly, that reference to bacon is right on the border. Right. But other than that, should they be able to say defund the police? Yeah. Should they be able to say, abolish dismantle? Should they be able to say, all white people are racist? Hell, yeah, they should be able to say all that garbage doesn't make it true. But the point is, they're right to say that is the you know, it comes along with our right to say, Here's why that's garbage, right? And here's why that is insane. Here's why. If you believe those things, you don't belong anywhere near the levers of power, because you're going to, you're going to wreck the ship that all of us are depending on. So in any case, you know, the irony is that that the abolish the police movement is also very interested in dictating what can and cannot be said. And to bring this around to where we started. The really interesting thing, they have been very effective at policing speech, right? Not by punishing those who speak, right? They're only a certain amount of successful at that, but it's the fat for every person who speaks up and is punished. There are 1000s who self censor, right? And so this exploration of, you know, well, okay, I am for that, but I'm not for this other stuff you're saying, right, this attempt to parse the distinction between the, the fraction of the message that does the heavy lifting and then the payload, right? That exploration is about people waking up to the need to figure out how to say these things and I wish frankly, they were being a hell of a lot more courageous about it, but the fact that they're doing the exploration at all is hopeful and the fact that Mayor Wheeler is recognizing that in fact, you know what they're gonna say shitty things about him right? But they're gonna say shitty things about him anyway. Oh, yeah. Right no matter what he

Heather 43:55
he cannot appease the mob who'd literally declares themselves and I didn't find it but there are a number of places in the social media feeds of the of the self proclaimed anarchists saying we are ungovernable and I believe in but they were marching with those signs literally the night of the night that Biden was elected. We are uncut. We are the ungovernable we are in governable. Yep. You know, burn it all down. Why would you try to appease people who say that,

Bret 44:23
right, especially after they spent the entire summer pretending that the violence was about Trump, right. And then the point is, some of us have been saying, no,

Heather 44:30
it is trending. It was about you know, and and about police violence and all it wasn't just Trump, of course. Well, I agree. But I mean, in Portland, a lot of it was you know, Trump sent in the Fed is Trump's Right, right.

Bret 44:40
And so the point is cause and effect were inverted. And, you know, they're gonna say terrible things about Mayor Wheeler, no matter what, right? We're gonna say terrible things about Mayor Wheeler, to the extent that Mayor Wheeler is a terrible Mayor to the extent that he comes around and starts acting in Portland's interest, will say, you know what, we're First off about what went before, but thank goodness, we're headed in the right direction.

Heather 45:04
Like we always say to our children, it's about the future man. It's about the future. We get it right from now on.

Bret 45:10
It's about the future. And so what did you learn? Yeah, so, so this is this is interesting, I should say, in passing. We have invited Mayor Wheeler on the program before.

Heather 45:26
Have we have you?

Bret 45:27
I believe I have if I haven't, it's an oversight. I meant to but I believe I have. I wouldn't. I'm going to invite him again, if he would like to talk about what is in the interest of Portland? What is the future of liberalism? Any of these things? That'd be wonderful. I think it would be great to have him I would also say

Unknown 45:47
to Paul Krugman,

Bret 45:51
what you tweeted yesterday, which Heather rightly took you to task, he was not alone in doing so. But right, we took you to task four, it indicates that you have completely lost sight of what is actually taking place in certain parts of the country, like for example, Portland, where Yes, actually violent mobs have taken to actually damaging the city and threatening citizens regularly.

Heather 46:15
I mean, it's evidence of either a willful blindness or lying, or again, a kind of this innumeracy, which, for God's sake, a Nobel laureate in economics should not be guilty of, but like, I took a run and I didn't, nothing bad happened to me. Therefore, nothing bad happens in that part of the city ever, sort of sort of logic. And I don't know if he took any runs, whatever. But I've seen that kind of logic from other journalists like, Well, I was out in that place that they say is dangerous and nothing happened. Like, that's, that's the same. It's the same logic as mostly peaceful.

Bret 46:47
It is. On the other hand, I mean, first of all, this one is so easy to falsify. And Krugman ended up looking so dumb for having said this, that I don't think it could be anything it's it's not a numeracy, right can't be numeracy, it can't be lying, because it would be so stupid to engage in this kind of line. It has to be, look, dude, your filter bubble is actually preventing you from actually knowing what's going on. And it's at a level that is dangerous.

Heather 47:17
No, I think I think there's an adjacent hypothesis, which is going to sound very similar, but it's actually different. Your filter bubble is preventing you from voicing what is going on, and maybe it's preventing you from seeing it. But even if you can see it, you shall not say it. And so there are some number of people in that filter bubble that Krugman presumably shares with, you know, a whole lot of other big name powerful journalists and thinkers and all who actually can begin to see can see what is going on. But they will be ostracized, they will be shunned, if you know if they say it, and you know, we see the same kind of filter bubble and you know, it's the gated institutional narrative that your brother so named the gin, over in, you know, origins of COVID space. Yep. And in actually, the trans rights activists are not speaking for most trans people space, and you know, a lot of these things where, you know, a number of us are like, actually, no, and sorry, you can't fire me, I don't work for you. Right. And but a lot of people, you know, have jobs have employers and don't feel like they can say anything. So that's, you know, the vast majority of Americans. And really, it's incumbent on people like Krugman and the other the other trendsetters, who do kind of ish have employers, but actually could say anything that they need to that they feel is true, to look outside the damn filter bubble, and to say what is true, and to never make these claims that are so easily falsifiable. Oh, my God.

Bret 48:51
All right. So, you know, I agree that there there are at least two adjacent explanations in here and that the the right explanation is labeled to be somewhere in this neighborhood. I do think Surely, Paul Krugman discovered something in him having tweeted what he did, he tweeted that conservatives are all under the false impression that violent mobs have been damaging major cities, and this happens to have happened without the notice of the people who live in those cities. So Paul, you fucked up. We live in Portland. It has happened here. We have been absolutely steadfast and careful in not exaggerating what has happened here. The violence has been relentless, but it has been concentrated on narrow parts of the city. So there is regular violence. It is not the city as a whole on fire or anything like that. But it has happened we have noticed,

Heather 49:52
although it's also true that homicides and fatal car crashes are way up this year and that's less concentrated and you know, is that is Who exactly is to blame? Well, the move that has been somewhat successful to defund the police and to defund particular branches of policing are in part, are in part to blame for that. And the reason that the city council was able to move forward with that move was largely because of mob support for an anarchic branch of BLM.

Bret 50:25
Absolutely. I should point out that Paul can also look up the fact that an Tifa broke into the mayor's own building and lit a fire in his lobby, despite the fact that there were families inhabiting the building upstairs. This is not this is not fiction, it's not symbolic. It's not hard to find, if you look for it. So two things, I would say, one, Paul, you should come on the program, and you should talk to us, it's the right thing to do, having discovered that somehow, whatever it is that you're doing to source information on how things are going in places like Portland has somehow caused you to miss the salient pieces of information, and you'll get a fair shake. If you come on dark horse. I would also suggest actually, the more I think about it, I would like people if they haven't encountered the piece that I wrote for unheard to check it out. We will link it in the description here. And it discusses a number of things including the predicament of those of us citizens who would like a functional city in which we didn't feel like we had to be armed. But have had to reluctantly purchase arms because it was clear that we couldn't rely on the protection of the police with the the mayor's office hobbling them. And I would say that that piece also ends on an important note about what could be true of a place like Portland, if it decided to make to not make the same mistakes as LA and New York and Seattle. And these other cities are just

Heather 52:03
I mean, really, we and we've talked about this before, but the West Coast has suffered very similar fate to the Big West Coast cities have suffered similar fates due to frankly, similar ideological underpinnings becoming dominant in those cities. San Diego la San Diego is a bit of an outlier here. But la San Francisco Seattle, why when looking at those, those other major cities on the west coast, would you say, you know, okay, yeah, Portland, let's try the same. And you know, we're clearly there. Portland is smaller. And it's less far along in terms of its economic development. And why wouldn't we aspire to be the shining jewel, that you know that Seattle and San Francisco and La have been in parts? I don't know, I don't know what all we could we could be amazing at. But it is a beautiful city with an extraordinary populace. And we're just we're encouraging a tiny band of anarchists to set the narrative.

Bret 53:07
Yeah, we're destroying the tax base, and will therefore mean that the city will be hobbled in doing what it needs to do for its citizens. And frankly, all of the oppressed people that liberals of this stripe have given so much lip service would be better served by actually governing the city in a way that it was economically vibrant. So in any case, you could check out that that article, it deals with this, and it deals with the very uncomfortable question of whether or not what has happened in LA, San Francisco, Seattle, and Portland is that the tension that makes things so good, the tension, where liberals try to solve problems, and conservatives hold their feet to the fire and focus on the potential unintended consequences, that has failed and it is the unopposed and therefore uninvestigated kind of liberalism that we're seeing that is the hazard, you know, you're hearing this from liberals, this is not an indictment of the idea of progress. This is a recognition that you need people to hold your feet to the fire or terrible ideas and up as policy.

Heather 54:16
Yeah. And, you know, it is a truism in modern American politics that cities trend blue and the rural areas trend red. But um, you know, New York, I think is going to look different from the west coast cities because because it is more diverse politically, that the east coast in the major cities in the middle of the country and on the on the Gulf Coast, or near in the south, are more politically diverse, there is more pushback, and the West Coast has a kind of homogeneity, a lack of diversity actually. And its ideological underpinnings. That meant that as this thing started to ascend, there were very few people in any position of power who actually were on the right, or those of us on the left who, you know, maybe took a little longer to See it, then people on the right would have because it came shrouded and stuff that sound like it was coming from the left to say now hold on a minute. Yeah. That's that is not going to end? Well. Yeah.

Bret 55:10
Yeah, absolutely. Well, in any case, we'll see where this goes. I mean, it could go a lot of places. I certainly did not expect to see. Mayor Wheeler take a stand yesterday. So maybe that's a hopeful sign. And hopefully he'll he'll stick to it and take us up on our offer to come visit Dark Horse.

Heather 55:27
Yeah, that would be great. Here's just a note about state of journalism. This is from last Sunday's New York Times the very top of Sunday review, which is, you know, to my reading, we still get this. We still get this hard copy of the Sunday, New York Times. And I always take crap from people when I admit that and you have no response.

Bret 55:52
Well, we get it for extra so don't have birds. What we don't have no, no, no. exercise, exercise. Yes. Rolling our eyes.

Heather 56:01
Nice. crossing our T's. Wow. So this is Sunday. What do you mean, does it say Actually, I have a hardcopy or see I actually do have it Sunday, April 18. The very top of Sunday review, it says, with a quote that's actually attributed, like I presume it's in this front, this article that is titled Minnesota, comma America. But the quote at the very top without attribution is my great grandparents joined in the Great Migration to land in Minneapolis. And over the years, we've all seen how neighbors choose to ignore the suffering of those who don't look like them. So I didn't go to journalism school, you know, I was, I was in journalism in high school, right? I don't really know what it is the journalists are supposed to be doing like by by the book are actually have thought deeply about exactly what their job is supposed to be. But I know that the best journalism that I've seen, goes and collects individual stories from people as a way to either build a story or to add color to a story that they've already got. And then either uses those stories to build an analysis or better goes and finds analysis that other people have done and uses the stories to basically tie together the analysis. In this quote, what we have is an individual presumably the sounds like some some Brando living in Minneapolis, right? Who a journalist has gotten stuck on Mike in their face, but like to what do you attribute the causes of societal ills? And I mean, just just look, there's a no personal story here, except my great grandparents joined in the Great Migration. So it sounds like this is a lived experience, or sorry, and lived experience as much as it's taken a lot of flak lately cannot be the basis for an underpinning of an understanding of reality. But it is what all of us know. So it's not that it's it's a flawed way of understanding the world, unless you take it as the only way of understanding the world. So here's the beginning of a story. But then, and over the years, we've all seen how neighbors choose to ignore the suffering of those who don't look like them. That's that is a claim that requires substantial evidence. And frankly, I was I think in the wake of the Shogun verdict, Gavin Newsome, I believe can I hope I get this right tweeted that out? There's no way what happened to him would have happened to that what what happened to Floyd would have happened to new some because of his white skin. And our friend, Camille foster is like I know enough about this case. No, that's not true. No, no and no, like, as much as this verdict. Has. You talked about a lot of the things that are true about that verdict? There is nothing in that has to do with with race?

Bret 58:57
Well, there's a style of thinking, yeah, that explains the kind of journalism you're talking about explains governor Newsom's odd statement, as the governor of California and so much of the rest of this, which is, I have a position for some reason I take it as essentially, God given right, it is the right position. Vaccines are safe, for example. Therefore, everything that points in that direction is true. And everything that points in the other direction is false. Right. And, you know,

Heather 59:30
it's like the last brand loyalty for ideology. Yes, it but it's, it's

Bret 59:35
the logic of a third grader, right? It's the logic of a third grader that just feels entitled to the facts. And, you know, the world would be shaped around these simple distinctions that the person is drawing. And the frightening thing is that we are being governed by people who now increasingly think this way and I don't think that they inherently think this way. I don't think these you know, I mean, it's It's amazing how many people we know in the heterodoxy world have some version of smart yet idiot, which I think is is Nassim to labs version of it. That's his phrasing, right. And the point is, I'm not saying they don't have mental horsepower to think I'm just saying they say stupid shit all the time. And that is an indictment of whatever it is that they're doing, instead of thinking, right? So the we are living in a world between, you know, governmental authorities, and journalists and university professors, and tech moguls, where all of these people seem to feel that they are entitled to be right. And that anything that points in another direction is inherently cheating, and that they have the right to silence it or chastise it or whatever it is that they do. And the point is look, that can't work. That's like setting a really good course and then putting on blinders and imagining you're going to end up where you go, you've got to be able to deal dynamically with the discovery that you were slightly off or that the wind put us somewhere where you didn't you didn't know that you were and this is just This is madness. This is not how we can govern ourselves. This is the recipe for taking everything that works and recommend.

Heather 1:01:28
Yeah. Yes. Okay. You haven't seen this. This announcement hold on Zack was made on Twitter. Boy, I guess that's April 23. That's yesterday and already has 186,000 likes. Wow,

Bret 1:01:56
that sounds very likeable. Yes,

Heather 1:01:57
so likable. So Zack, you can just show up very briefly Then give me my screen back. What's up? Yep. This, I don't know how to pronounce her name. GLORIA Dlamini. liebenberg says, My husband and I have introduced paid masterly for our female employees. This makes me so happy as a woman. So some women experience stability, debilitating menstrual cramps, and do indeed find it difficult to work for some days each month. And those women I know, I've known some of them do find it unnerving to have to request sick days, especially on those on those days. It's not all women, I really don't think it's the majority of women. And in fact, at a different moment, perhaps. We can talk about actually what what ministration and all, you know, all of the things associated with it mean in light of our post industrial context and what it actually looks like in in pre industrial contexts. And what therefore we might be doing to alleviate a lot of this pain and agony for so many for so many women who live in the weird, world Western, educated, industrialized, rich, democratic countries. So it's not even close to majority of women, even in the weird world. Furthermore, most women, I believe, would prefer privacy to having a monthly leave in which their absence is therefore understood by their employer and all of their colleagues to be about this being that time of the month for them. This smacks to me of menstrual huts of for instance, the hodza in I think it's West Africa, and a few other hunter gatherer cultures in which women are eventually ostracized while they are while they're menstruating. And it's a way of publicly marking them in terms of where they are in their cycles which is a way for men to control fertility of women and obviously that's not the the motivation here it's not the motivation isn't to control the fertility of female workers but it does it feels exactly like that to me. And and, you know, it'll allow people who are keeping track to know when a woman is late. Maybe when she's entering menopause when things get less regular, this seems a little less than desirable for an employer and all the colleagues to know so you know, if this had emerged from a conservative obviously this would be this would be laughable, right? It'd be just insane just the ridicule that would have been incredible outrage you couldn't do what now? But I think also you're maybe the way to approach this as a way to make it clear that this is just a terrible policy and it it can't last like it just it's no no company that's doing this. Any company that does this, the women are going to start costing more. And then they're going to start hiring men more because the women cost more. And then there's going to be complaints that they aren't hiring enough women, and it's just down this road, Nothing good will come. But we do have, and I think it's, it's necessary that we have things like pregnancy leave. And there are real barriers to female success in career tracks that require you know, hard paced hard charging work exactly during your reproductive years, during which time, pregnancy and early motherhood may render you less able or less willing to be hard charging in the same way. And so at least in academia, the world that we know the best, there have been some moves to, for instance, stop the tenure clock for a year or two such that your public your publication record, during the time when you were perhaps perhaps having a kid does not count against you in the same way that it would it's not it's not a perfect solution. But it's you know, you can't you can't make it the same, right? Men and women are not the same. And this is you know, this is this will always be a problem. There is no easy solution. But I was just thinking that if, if time off for from illustration is to be a thing given that women men straight and men don't Yeah, you heard it here first. That's that's actually true. In the name of equity, I think then Following this, businesses lead, it's also true across cultures across time that men have shorter lifespans than women. And therefore we should mandate early retirement for men to allow for the same average period of lifespan that's post post work. So in order to provide equitable post retirement

Bret 1:06:44
work, this is such a dangerous line of thinking because of course, that limits mail earning potential, so you would have to pay them more to burn the same amount. It's a shorter period of time, given that our laws are accelerated. Yeah, this is really terrible stuff.

Heather 1:06:59
It's awful. It's, it's ridiculous. Yeah,

Bret 1:07:01
it's preposterous. And I, you know, it's another wonderful demonstration of the need for rawlsian, the veil of ignorance thinking because, of course, if, you know, as you suggest, in here, as you hint at, if it is true, that women deserve time off for menstrual symptoms, and there's no different difference between men and women than men also do, right. And so the point is, you can just see how if you begin to play with these conclusions, what the real point is, here are some people we would like to give an advantage to. And here's some logic we cobbled together to explain why they get the advantage. But the problem is, it's Lego, and you could take those same garbagey arguments and establish them to prioritize anybody,

Heather 1:07:52
there are differences, there are differences. Here's the way that we can frame these differences as a burden that needs to be eradicated. or, frankly, here's the wait. So I'm just the, you know, the insane proposal to allow men to retire earlier in order to you know, pursue an equitable outcome with regard to post retirement years, is just trying to make the burden, you know, the burden show up in the other column, like we can play this game all we want, right? And it's, it doesn't make it any more humane or reasonable, right? No. And

Bret 1:08:23
the irony of it, right is if you did play this game, right, if you really began to remake civilization, as we are doing based on these nonsense, conclusions that exist in isolation, and you know, steadfastly ignore the thing that would be on the other side of it, if you just simply uninvented all of the counter intuitive stuff that makes civilization work, and you employed it, you would create all of the failures that are so intolerable, and you would end up reinventing it on the other side, right? Right. I mean, if you survive to do it, right, the danger is, of course, that by hobbling ourselves, we don't exist in a vacuum, and we can't afford to go insane for 20 years with, you know, your China hovering outside, looking to poach, you know, opportunity or whatever. So we don't get the, we don't get that luxury. But where are we to do it? effectively, it would be like a lesson in why that counterintuitive stuff is so important. And you know, you can almost imagine the reinvention of all of it. And you know, how everybody would suddenly be aware of the importance of these things. And really, it's like, Can we just skip to that part? Can we skip to the part where we remind ourselves why these things are so important, and why ultimately, you cannot do better than, for example, a colorblind society. You cannot do better than a meritocracy in which people have equal access. And I'm not saying that that's what we have. But I am saying in terms of a goal, that's it. Yeah. You will not exceed it. Right. So yeah, we're

Heather 1:09:59
we've got some system that has the potential to be functional. And you know how functional it is. And where we are in the process is what the good faith people are disagreeing on. And we're going to get push here, push there a little bit of push. But we are being asked to say, Nope, we're going all the way over here, right? And that's because we've been all the way over here in the past, you know, like in 1950s, Alabama, and before the Civil War, and you know, all of these things. And you know, this kind of arc in society when we're going from extreme to extreme, does not leave a society after very many swings of that pendulum, whereas a relatively tight swing with adjustments, with the ability for constant push back against a trend towards extremism on any side can allow for progress. And history suggests that it does do exactly that.

Bret 1:10:51
Yeah. And you know, in some sense, you can reduce the entire thing to a battle between those who wish to fix what's wrong with the system. And all reasonable people recognize that it doesn't reach that which it aspires to do. But it's a battle between the people who want to fix what's wrong, and those who want to uninvented on the basis of what is claimed to be wrong. And the fact is, the people who want to uninvented don't know what they're talking about. They, they can't tell you where we're headed. They can't tell you how we would get there, and they don't appear to have even the basic skills to analyze, we know where you need a counterintuitive conclusion, and we just don't have time for them to learn it by destroying what we've got, and having to rediscover at all. Yeah.

Unknown 1:11:41
Well,

Heather 1:11:43
there's one more thing that I thought we might say something about, but maybe it's it's not worth not worth going there. Do you anything about this story?

Bret 1:11:50
I think so. I'm not wearing my glasses, so I can't quite

Heather 1:11:53
see it. Well, we're not going to go there, though. Okay, um, what else do you do? You have?

Bret 1:11:58
Yeah, we've got one more thing I wanted to talk a little bit about the podcast that I did with Garrett vandenbosch. And what has befallen it over in Facebook space.

Heather 1:12:09
Before you do that? Let me say that I have. I have listened to part of it. I intend to listen to all of it. And that I have seen request for us to discuss some of what you talk about there. And we're just not prepared to do that yet. Yeah, we're not going to revisit we may not we may not do at all but the

Bret 1:12:26
content, but let's just catch people up on what we're talking about. So I released a podcast with Garrett Vanden Bush, who is by training, he is a doctor of Veterinary Medicine. He's also got professional academic experience in vaccine creation and Immunology. In any case, he made quite a stir by releasing an argument that the current vaccine campaign was in danger of creating escape mutants that could make the pandemic far worse rather than better and I had him on the podcast and I made a decision to attempt to make the underlying immuno biology clear in this podcast so that people could evaluate his argument the fact of his argument created quite a stir but I wanted people to understand why he's making the argument what the scientific claim is based on so that they could then compare it to alternative claims.

Heather 1:13:30
He really treated it like a classroom he really gave a primer on immunobiology

Bret 1:13:36
Yeah, and I think you know, I wasn't sure about that decision, but I think it worked quite well and lots of people we've had lots of feedback from people who appreciated being able to look into the the underlying questions. In any case, I wasn't sure what would happen to it on YouTube YouTube has I think left it intact and it has done well on YouTube. Facebook on the other hand, has taken to a pending a warning to anybody who attempts to post it and clearly based on the number of people who end up liking it they are obscuring it from almost everyone and the actually Zack Do you want to put up the warning that they have Okay, so this is the warning that you get if you attempt to post my podcast and I need to read it so that people who are listening to see it says yeah, yeah if you would.

Heather 1:14:33
This is Zachary our producer son.

Unknown 1:14:35
It says from independent fact checkers, about loose noticed independent fact checkers say this information is is missing context and could mislead people. Learn more about how Facebook works with independent fact checkers to stop the spread of false information.

Bret 1:14:51
So if you click through on the Word says fact check, mass vaccinations. And COVID-19 Pemex pandemic does not.dot.if you click through on that set, can you show the site? So it goes to a independent quote unquote independent fact checking site.

Bret 1:15:19
Yep. So okay, so I guess you can see it here. Now. What this is, is this lead stories site, having supposedly fact checked, Garrett Vanden Bush's argument, and deploying counter arguments, and Facebook has decided to declare that this site is objective. And in fact, the URL for this declares this declares what vandenbosch has advanced as a hoax which is preposterous I must tell you, as I said in my podcast, so I

Heather 1:16:00
don't I've never I don't know anything about the site. It's the first time I've ever seen it, would we?

Bret 1:16:05
I've never seen any I don't know and and all I can say is that Facebook is using this as an official source and if you scroll down, scroll down through it. Keep going, keep going, keep going. There you go. Look, they've got a clickbait video that claims to debunk Garrett Vanden Bush's argument I have watched this video now the video makes some interesting arguments right? They are in no way higher quality than what Garrett is deploying right in effect what Facebook has done is it has taken counter arguments and decided that they are correct because they go in the direction of something Facebook wants to claim which is that these vaccines are safe this goes right to the point we were making previously where

Heather 1:16:53
well so just there's there's two distinct points the vaccines are safe in isolation and it is safe to widely vaccinate during a pandemic those are two because as I understand it, Garrett actually thinks that under the right conditions, in fact the thought experiment that you provide is if if COVID had been restricted to Eurasia and North America for instance, North and South America or yet unexposed to COVID mass vaccination of exactly these vaccines in North and South America right now would be saved by his estimation

Bret 1:17:22
right? So my point is that what Facebook is doing is it is deciding to find Are there any experts or people that we can claim are experts who disagree with this and then if there are which there always will be that we are going to declare them right and therefore declare this other thing? Not only incorrect but a hoax right? Because that's what the URL says it's a hoax which is nonsense and so it's a little hard for me to know even where to start with this

Heather 1:17:57
hoax is a strange new accusation too. I mean, obviously there have been charges of hoax Enos forever, but it feels to me like that's rising in power as an accusation that gets leveled. So you know the epithets racist transphobic anti vaxxer but hoax is like next level fake news. Like maybe gear doesn't even exist. isn't a really big that's maybe he's not really, you know, like, What what? I feel like hoax is being the term hoax is being weaponized here in a new way, as well.

Bret 1:18:27
It's being weaponized. And I think that the purpose of it is that, to the extent that you can do anything that invokes the idea of hoax, right, yeah, then what you're effectively doing is saying, if you listen to in this case, Garret vandenbosch, and he seems to make sense to you. That's because you're being taken, right? So it is a very different style of argument, then this is incorrect, because which we can evaluate. In the case of the claim of hoax, what they're effectively doing, is saying that to the extent that you think you have evaluated it, you're a sucker, right? And so what that will cause is anybody who sees the claim that something is a hoax, especially coming through something, as you know, big and important as Facebook will simply not get anywhere near it because they don't want to be a sucker.

Heather 1:19:16
We know you're busy. We've saved you some time here. You don't need to go there at all.

Bret 1:19:22
Right? But here's my point. This podcast and I think with yours with Gary mine with Gary, our listeners should seek it out and they should listen to and what you will hear are two people who have relevant expertise and insight, having a discussion in which they bend over backwards to make clear why the logic is what it is. Right? There is nothing hook see about this. Could it be wrong? Sure. Now I'm very careful not to say I don't know whether care is right. But I do know that he is making sense right? That is something I am in a position to evaluate. He is making sense So what do you do with the fact of Facebook deciding to simply search for some claimed expert that disagrees with this and then decide, oh, because there's an expert who disagrees, this is now missing context, or it's a hoax, or it's incorrect, or whatever their conclusion is, the point is, that's nonsense. That's not how analysis functions. That's not how we discover what is true. And of course, we are again, in the position where if we played this game long enough, and we did enough harm by allowing Facebook to decide, you know, how facts are made, or whatever it is, then we would ultimately discover that we needed to liberate people to have arguments in which they disagreed. And the medium through which they are disagreeing, does not intervene and declare these people, right, and those people unforgiveable. And whatever it is, we would rediscover the need for things like universities and salons and freedom to advance counterintuitive claims and not suffer a social penalty for it. These are the things that we would rediscover if we ran this experiment to its logical conclusion. And we're not going to get a chance to because what we are in effect doing is signing over our sensemaking capacity to entities like Facebook, that don't have the basis to make these kinds of decisions. Right? These aren't biologists and frankly, as a biologist, I can say this is difficult material, right? It's a struggle, no matter who you are, no matter how much you know, nobody knows enough to say this is true. And that is false, right? It has to unfold in the form of a discussion in which arguments are advanced, and then they are honed as a result of counter arguments. And then we ultimately discover what our best guess as to what's going to happen in this case is, and the idea that Facebook thinks otherwise is frankly insane. And all I can say is get over your goddamn cells. You aren't that smart, you aren't that well informed, and you're going to have to let the adults talk. Alright, I'm off my soapbox

Heather 1:22:09
good. Not good that you're off it but I was good

Bret 1:22:12
I'm off it for now I'm keeping the soapbox in case I got to get back up there and say some other stuff.

Heather 1:22:17
You know I use it sometimes.

Bret 1:22:18
I Yeah, I do. I do. You know that? I know that. I know how to use the soapbox when I said

Heather 1:22:25
do you know that? I use it sometime? Oh, sure. Yeah. Okay. Sorry. thumbnail for this week.

Bret 1:22:33
thumbnail for this week. Hey, Zack, do you want to put up those? So I did some? Yeah, just any order we'll do. All right. That someone on Twitter thought that that was awesome.

Heather 1:22:51
But we didn't talk about that this week. We talked about that last week. What's going on here for the people just listening.

Bret 1:22:57
This is the mother coyote howling at you and me who are standing next to the den where her two kits are housed and hoping to drive us off so that she can turns out move them what she did and last week we showed some video of her grabbing one of the kits and running off to wherever her new den might be.

Heather 1:23:20
I mean that is a beautiful photograph but I think a lot of people wanted an update this week and we haven't provided one and especially that given that we can't really use this as a thumbnail

Bret 1:23:29
okay it's episode we will not use this as a thumbnail perhaps we

Heather 1:23:32
can promise that we will give an update next week.

Bret 1:23:37
Sure Sure. I must say the reason that showed up here was that I was going through the camera the pictures on the camera and discovered that I had gotten that I didn't have any idea that I had captured that image but it's beautiful All right here we have a well officially it's a great blue heron I would say it's a pretty good Blue Heron down at the the Oaks bottom Wildlife Refuge this I thought this was amazing this it turns out I am essentially certain is a golden eagle

Heather 1:24:15
although certainly hear from people if anyone thinks it's not yeah but I believe I looked at that picture close up and that was my best guess but I'm like totally good with the Raptors

Bret 1:24:25
so yeah, it's a it's a very very large animal it's clearly not a bald eagle. I think it almost has to be a golden eagle. But anyway beautiful creature I did none of the correction of the photograph I should have done but anyway, there it is. Gorgeous creature that right here in in Portland.

Heather 1:24:45
Golden Eagle could be our you know, you know, could be our thumbnail for this week working towards an excellent future. And you know, it's not it's not our national bird but it's close. related. Yeah,

Bret 1:25:01
it's a it's a it's a good an honorable bird. All right here we have a nutria. I got quite close to down at edX bottom. This is an invasive, semi aquatic rodent that we've talked about a little bit. And there he is eyeing me suspiciously. And here he is swimming. In front of a Mallard. It's definitely nutrient. Yep. Well, we'll find out if it's not, but the three possibilities are

Heather 1:25:30
I could look feverish from here. No, I'm not looking. I can't see really

Bret 1:25:34
tails all wrong, but they do look very similar when they're swimming. Okay, next one. Now, this one, this is no thumbnail, but I want help on this one. So there's an interesting phenomenon. It's a crocodile. It's an interesting phenomenon down at this wildlife refuge.

Heather 1:25:49
on the big screen, Zach. Thank you.

Bret 1:25:51
The Wildlife Refuge has a rather large beaver pond as the central water feature. And as I was cycling up to a snag getting that picture of the Great Blue Heron, I was effectively had water on three sides of me. And it was a in the evening during the golden hour. And these fish were engaging in this flopping behavior, which actually when you and I and Toby were down at the refuge, we saw this flopping behavior, but there was something else going on here, which was I'm standing with these fish around me. And the flopping behavior actually at some moments appears to be coordinated, right? So I would just want

Heather 1:26:41
to say you know how, in some populations of tursiops of dolphins, they will group hunt, fish and cycle and circle them into tight coils before they go in for the kill. So maybe you were targeting

Bret 1:26:54
I was they were hunting me. That's impossible. I won't rule it out. But anyway, what I was watching was every so often, a bunch of them would seem to startle simultaneously so there'd be three or four fish in different places and then they would suddenly all create a stir. And I'm certainly someone who is an expert, either an egg theologist or an angler is going to know what creature This is. Obviously, freshwater beaver pond. It has a connection marshland

Heather 1:27:29
to the Willamette

Unknown 1:27:30
is likely to be a carp So again, the chat thinks it's likely to be carp oh

Bret 1:27:35
I find that unlikely but a lot of the chat thinks that if it's a carp then somebody must have put it there right that's quite possible. Yeah. All right. Well, that's interesting and it's even possible I suppose that given that this is a managed wild land that a carp has been put in for some purpose like controlling mosquitoes or I don't know what But anyway, it didn't strike me as any animal that I recognize that's a large animal I should point out that animals probably want to eat put in like a quarter for scale, but and a half I did it just sank. Yeah,

Heather 1:28:09
well, I tried. That's why they were struggling. You kept hitting them with court

Bret 1:28:13
orders that they thought it was a drinking game. Alright, so I guess that's it in terms of photographs for this week.

Heather 1:28:22
Cool. Okay. Well, that's it for us for this week. For those of you listening. We're going to take a 15 minute break and be back with our live q&a, as is I want answering questions you have posed during the Super Chat this hour and next. Once again tomorrow and 11am Pacific is our monthly two hour q&a for patrons. Please consider joining us there. Brett also has conversations at his Patreon every month and the first one always on the first Saturday and Sunday of the month. So the first one will be taking place right before our live stream next Saturday. Send any questions you have to Darkhorse dot moderator@gmail.com. You can we are maybe moving forward on getting some new merchandise available. But we do have some good stuff at store Darkhorse podcast.org and our clips channel is is just producing stuff at a terrific terrific rate. And

Bret 1:29:21
you almost boxed yourself in at a terrific clip. And then you said rate and I just thought very professionally

Heather 1:29:29
as is the work that day. Lewis has created in his managing is pretty on the clips for that channel is doing terrific work. So consider subscribing, both to that. And to this channel, liking. Commenting for the algorithm. You know joining us at our patrons on social media if you like and make sure to be good. Be good to the people whom you love and eat good food and get outside.

Bret 1:30:00
All right, you will everyone will see you shortly.

This transcript was generated by https://otter.ai