Bret 0:16
Hey folks, welcome to the Dark Horse podcast live stream what we are now calling the post Joe Rogan experience. Alright, so I'm calling it I don't know it seemed to me at that moment that that's what we should call it but in any case we are here this is our 24th live stream I'm sitting with Dr. Heather hying. And there is as has been the case for months now a lot going on in the world.

Heather 0:43
Yeah, which is part of why we started doing this. But first today is the solstice it is the solstice is the solstice it is the summer solstice here in the Northern Hemisphere, the winter solstice for those few people who are watching and live in the southern hemisphere, meaning it's the longest day of the year. It is the year during the moment during which also our Twilight's are actually lasting longest as well, for the same reason that's the longest day of the year. So first day of astronomical summer, historical midsummer. So Shakespeare's Midsummer's night stream was about this moment, not a month and a half from now,

Bret 1:22
you alerted me to this fact before I had not thought about it. But it makes a great deal of sense that what we call summer would actually have moved and we are now talking about in the same way that we have altered the meaning of time to become like laboratory time, rather than time the way humans experience that we have altered summer to be this solar solar definition rather than either defining it around the way the seasons actually happened, where you are or defining it, where the maximal day length would be the middle of that period. We've defined it where it starts at this period where dealings begin to shorten

Heather 1:58
Yeah, we I mean we could it could be defined mid summer could be the solstice right and that would also be astronomically global. I mean, that would be a truth that was that applied to the whole earth but it is nature of seasonality is so varied depending on where you are on the planet. I remember growing up in LA as you did as well, hearing these aphorisms like April showers bring May flowers thinking I don't think it's ever rained in April in LA.

Bret 2:25
I used to shower in April. See if I could get flowers.

Heather 2:28
No never any

Bret 2:30
effect but

Heather 2:31
yeah, the only you know the seasonality and La the Santa Ana winds that come in and September and October and start fires. There's there's no aphorisms about that. So summer solstice is a reality. It's the solstice everywhere on the planet, Winter Solstice in the southern hemisphere, somewhere in the northern and and here we are. Now the days get shorter, but slowly, but the days also get warmer for a while.

Bret 2:55
So all SB dos being equal. This is the point where you have the maximum opportunity to produce vitamin D per per day. Yes, this is that point.

Heather 3:05
ever more evidence suggests that that is something that you might want to be doing right now. Given that it seems to be protective against Coronavirus. Yes,

Bret 3:13
it's something you should want to do for lots of reasons, it's makes you much healthier, and less vulnerable in general, but with respect to COVID-19 might be particularly important. Incidentally, I ran across something on this front as long as we're talking about daylight. A recent paper reflects that one of the hypotheses that we advanced and talked about turns out to be right, which is that one of the reasons that source code two is not transmitted outdoors as easily as indoors, in fact, vastly less easy, is that apparently UV light is highly destructive of source code to. So we now know that for a fact, which opens the possibility if that's the only factor, then it's suggested outdoors might not be so safe at night. Whereas if it's one of a couple of factors, like we've talked about the other factor that's probably highly relevant is the airflow and the volume, the absolute volume of the air in question. So we're developing a kind of model in which for some reason, instead of a virus being able to get into you and infect you, there's some level at which you can absorb these things, not specifically, they're dealt with maybe by macrophages, or something. And at the point, you've overwhelmed the macrophages then you are in jeopardy, and in an outdoor environment, the dissipation of these things, and if it's daytime, the destruction of them in the sunlight makes it unlikely you will cross that threshold whereas indoors, it can happen in a five minute conversation if somebody is sick and expelling virus towards you. And

Heather 4:46
I think I think most of our intuitions if we've spent any time in the physical world are pretty good on this front. I'm remembering as you talk about. I was in San Antonio in November of last year and I found myself having dinner One night and outdoor restaurant but it was in a little alley between two buildings. And I had been very eager to sit outside because I always am unless conditions are stifling in some regard. But because it was really narrow between two rather tall buildings, I had the sense that the air wasn't as fresh as I wanted it to be. And, you know, given what we know about these transmissions inside, you know, interior restaurants of the Coronavirus, where people sitting it's sort of in line of the H fac flow end up getting infected at much higher rates. And those people outside of that, of course, if you're in some kind of an urban jungle, outside probably isn't going to be as protective as if you're in an outside space with a lot of airflow as well. So we've got a few of these parameters to wrestle with. Absolutely. And

Bret 5:45
we have indicators from history that people have intuited certain things sometimes incorrectly. So I believe that both plague and malaria have been attributed to stale air. In the historical past before the proper germ theory of disease told us what was going on. In the case of malaria. Malaria is exactly what it means. It's not really a question of air volume, it's a question of mosquitoes, which inhabits swampy kind of air. And in the case of

Heather 6:13
so they just got him at the, at a gross level and an imprecise level, the observation is kind of accurate, right? Like if you're hanging out in an area with stagnant water, that tends to produce stagnant air air that smells of the anoxic stuff that it's emerging from, you're more likely to have mosquitoes around which are, which are the things that vector malaria, right, it's inaccurate, but there is an observation that's real at the base.

Bret 6:36
And it's also true that in the case of plague, which, at least in the majority of cases, is transmitted by fleas, you're also talking about a place if you were in some dank place where, you know, there were rats, I mean, rats in particular, have a smell that you can detect walking into a room. So there is some sort of indicator in the air. And it's not that you're smelling fleas, but nonetheless, it's good enough, the sense that that's maybe not a smell that you want to hang around, is,

Heather 7:03
at some level, both of them are indicators of kind of, you know, trust your nose, trust your senses. Yeah, if something is telling you back off, just like if you run into a decaying, you know, roadkill, or pile of feces, you're everything in you says, Don't get closer to that.

Bret 7:20
Yep, those intuitions are built around that which of course, also fits with our sense of beauty, perhaps being an indicator of lots of proxies, for things that are useful or valuable, or they tend to imply opportunity or whatever. So anyway, what a shock that we are well designed for environments in which our senses can detect things that clue us into hazards, we may not be able to name or describe,

Heather 7:44
and that many of us feel more afield than maybe we even recognize our ancestors would have. Because so many of us are not even living now in the environments in which we grew up. Not only are aphorisms, our cultural norms built around places that most of us may not live at the moment. But our development environment is not a match for our current environment. And so we are we are, we are simply out of touch with our own selves and a lot of ways

Bret 8:14
Yeah, we are out of our depth and an environment that we have largely created. Yeah. So well wait before we before we move on from the solstice, I want to say one other thing, which is there's there's some facts about the solstice and other celestial events that I think need to be said out loud, because we just the lesson is not it's not well taught in general.

Heather 8:33
And I'm gonna interrupt you and say that you I mean, we but this was, this is one of the things that you lead when we used to teach together, you created a workshop that grew every time with God, I should, I wasn't prepared for this. But you know, three pages of questions like single line questions like, you know, 10s and 10s, closing it on 100 questions that you asked students to figure out, you know, what, what they knew about it, and whether or not they actually knew or if they were just accepting something they've heard everything from, you know, what is the solstice to? Why are seasons and you know, what are tides? What

Bret 9:10
are tides and Why are there two high tides a day? That's the one

Heather 9:13
that's the one that was most dumping? Yeah, the most? Yeah. stifling. Yeah.

Bret 9:17
So what I wanted to say was that, a, I hope the religious folks in our audience won't take this the wrong way. But there are certain facts about the universe that really strongly suggest that one of two things has to be true, either the universe was not designed by an engineering entity that wanted all this to happen, or it was and that entity didn't like us or want us to succeed. So one of them is that the number of days in a year is not an integer, but it's close. Yeah. And because it's close. What that means is that for cultures that try to figure out how long the calendar is, they can't nail it because they tend to be one day long or one day short. At least. And when you do that, you tend to think for some number of years that you've got it right because the vagaries the noise of weather obscures the signal that you would detect as a slight shift every year of you know, if you put the right data plant is this day, it won't be way off for 20 years, maybe right? And you won't be able to detect it because of the you know, the variation in the seasons.

Heather 10:22
Weather weather is noise to the climate underlying,

Bret 10:25
right. And so anyway, cultures around the world have there been two, two things done. One is you try to calculate it better and better. And eventually you discover that it's not an integer, and you figure out what to do about that new insert something like leap year in order to correct for this slight shift, right.

Heather 10:42
Which is currently why this year right now the solstice is on the 20th rather than the usual 21st. This year is a leap year. So we had the 29th that got in the way. Other than that, yeah, we would be on the 21st as it usually is, although really the Celsius is a moment in time, not a day. So it's a 5:30pm something today anyway.

Bret 11:03
And so we celebrate short years, three years and four. Yeah. Okay. So in any case, cultures have figured out another way to deal with this, which is not to go after the precision which is so maddeningly difficult to nail, but it's to actually go empirical. And so you'll find all of these clocks built into, into you know, mountainsides and structures, circular structures in which you know, on the solstice, the sun comes through this window, and you know, lights up that corner. Actually, I should have brought a picture of the canary version of this, but Oh, yeah. But anyway, there's there are all of these calendars that are physical calendars that don't need to be calibrated, because they are physical in the lining up of several things allows you to actually know what day of

Heather 11:49
the year it is, so long as you don't have cloud cover. Right? Well, but I mean,

Bret 11:53
you can still as it approaches, you know, even sort of tracking it. But so, there it is, the basic point is the calendar has been frustratingly difficult to nail down, it's actually very late emerging that we have a good answer to how long the year is that we can actually hang our hat on. And many cultures have worked around that by going empirical and it's left all of this beautiful architectural evidence. Yeah, all over the world. And you know, a lot of it is convergent. This isn't necessarily cultures getting it from each other. They're discovering the same problem and solving it in the same way. Yes, there's

Heather 12:26
certainly multiple evolutions of it. We know that Ingo perca, which is this current era Inca sort of collaboration in Ecuador, is obviously independent from Stonehenge. And there are many other examples that are independently evolved. arrivals at the same way at the same problem, the same universal human problem of how is it that we figure out what this planet is that we're living on? And when to plant? Really, I mean, there's a, I'm sure that there are other reasons that early humans that, you know, prehistory humans just meaning before humans were writing needed to be accurate about the time of year, but agriculture is a huge one. Yeah, right. And so we can expect that these sorts of empirical ways of telling time, over the course of a year, probably started to emerge 810 12,000 years ago, in the various places where agriculture started to emerge at exactly the same times, and again, independently, several evolutions several independent evolutions of agriculture across the world 10 and 12,000 years ago.

Bret 13:24
And so actually, final point, this also, it actually tells us something about our current moment, there's something about the internet and us interacting across arbitrary distances and time zones and all of that that's actually very disorienting. On the one hand, it alerts you to something true about the fact that you're on this planet full of people for whom it is not the same time of day, and they may be in the opposite season. But it is disorienting in the sense that once upon a time and not so long ago. What where you were seasonally was not so much a question of the calendar that we all share was a question of how the calendar interfaced with the particular ocean currents that were near you or whatever. And so I've always been troubled, for example, by the fact that we synonymized autumn with fall. My sense is fall is the period when the leaves are falling. Right. And that

Heather 14:18
varies a lot. It's not and in LA, for instance, there's no fall really, there's not unless you have

Bret 14:23
you know, ornamentals there's no one fall because the trees come from all over the place.

Heather 14:29
In a pre Columbian la there was no fall,

Bret 14:33
right? Yeah, yeah. So anyway, it just the the fact of, you know, even the discovery of timezones is is an interesting fact. And until then, the question of what time it was, is a little odd because, you know, you don't have to ask because it's obvious what time it is, at least, you know, yeah, during the day most days.

Heather 14:54
Well, I mean, actually, Zach, our producer and older teenage son just reminded me of this Something that he learned in history this year in which which I knew as well, which is that it was actually the advent of trains across the United States that forced cities and states and presumably the federal government to actually make uniform time because otherwise then there was no need for it. But if a train is coming in a particular moment, and you need to pick someone up, you need to catch a train, you actually all need to agree on what time it is and what that means

Bret 15:26
there's no need for it because horses are just not fast enough. Even at a horse crossing space, you don't have a disturbing discontinuity, whereas we now have well

Heather 15:36
but I think more more to the point that you don't know for sure if the horse is going to arrive at 4pm you can say expect to be there before dark and send a letter and say I'm hoping to be there before dark on the Saturday of the Harvest Moon or whatever it is, but there's not there's not a horse schedule the way there is a train schedule.

Bret 15:52
That's not really true. You know, in in the 16th century, no good pro fascists used to make the horses run on time, which was

Heather 16:02
famously I guess, yeah,

Bret 16:04
right. Okay.

Heather 16:08
Oh, Zack says he thinks it was also about making the trains not crash. So

Bret 16:11
it was an aesthetic concern. Yeah,

Heather 16:13
I think so. Yeah. One of these little niggling concerns. Okay, so you went to LA?

Bret 16:19
Yes, I did go to LA and actually, I must tell you I had not been on a plane.

Heather 16:24
Exactly. You want to talk about that a little bit? Because that is that was the first time either of us had traveled since February.

Bret 16:29
Yeah. And I wouldn't have done it if it wasn't very important. You know, Joe Rogan is a special phenomenon and so it seemed worth doing in light of what's going on in the world and the opportunity to talk about it with Joe to his audience. But the act of getting on an airplane was of all the things that I've seen I think it was the most different from normal right the experience from one end of the to the other of the airport of the airplane everything was bizarre and although in some ways you know, the airport was wonderfully empty at some level it was you know, it was a commerce space and my plane Zack, do you have the video Can you put the video on that I took up my plane Okay, so we'll show you a video of what it looked like

Bret 17:26
to LA see very few seats are full that would have been full Yeah, this flight would have been jam packed on a normal day So anyway, it's a very different and jarring experience and as much as lots of aspects of it were more comfortable I have to say the sense that something must have gone very very wrong for a plane to look like this during a normal flying period was it just never lifts you're constantly reminded that something is way off?

Heather 17:57
Well I mean you're you're enclosed in your face mask yeah one thing in fact I wore

Bret 18:00
not only my band and I were double facemask thinking that this was about the most dangerous thing I had engaged in since recirculated air you cannot escape from yeah they do say we get on the plane there now like these screens that broadcast information tell you that the errors have filtered I couldn't get anybody to tell me for sure whether that was normal and they're just telling us about it now or that's been added nobody seemed to know but at the moment it's broadcasting this information and all of these things are are

Heather 18:30
and that should I mean that should do it right this is a big virus that should have a filter filtration should do it

Bret 18:35
well if it was the virus alone, it wouldn't be enough but the fact that the virus travels in water

Heather 18:41
droplets really the virus alone would not be caught by the filter is that right?

Bret 18:45
I think that's right i think very small that there isn't there is a number I forget what the scale is but so anyway also in both directions my flight was either canceled or the plane was changed there's a lot that's just not functioning very well in this system so there is that but yes, I went to LA and LA is also very off it's just coming out of lockdown. So there's beginning to be traffic again and things like that. But it's rather surreal out there.

Heather 19:19
Oh bad. So I guess I'm curious and maybe most people wouldn't be if they don't know la well, but the idea of an Li without traffic strikes me is not really la you know, in a much a much improved environment but I think you're earlier in the lockdown. We were hearing that the streets were empty and kids are playing ball on the streets and and such and is there is there anything else you want to say about the experience of moving through la as it emerges from lockdown.

Bret 19:51
You know, the thing is, there's not very much reason to move through it.

Heather 19:56
So you just want to where you need to go

Bret 19:58
sort of you know, wherever you You're probably experienced unless you're in New Zealand, in which case I wish I was there with Yeah, but sombrio. Right. Are they completely free?

Heather 20:08
I'm not sure. Actually, I'm not sure.

Bret 20:10
But yeah, you're somewhere on pause, some kind of pause. And that experience varies a bit. But the weird sense of, you know, things happen in one place, and it can disrupt the functioning of a city, but for the world to be this way at once is very strange.

Heather 20:27
Yeah. So you were invited by Joe Rogan to go to go back on your fourth, fifth, fifth time. Third time alone, I believe. And early in your talk with him, you said that you'd been struck by police twice in your life. And the story that you told on air actually is when I had I had not heard, and we must have been living together at the time because the only time you lived in Berkeley was when we lived in Berkeley together. You said that you joined protests against homelessness in Berkeley because you supported the cause. But you hadn't even known that that was happening. Like just like through

Bret 21:04
it. And I just barked down there. Yeah, exactly.

Heather 21:07
And having joined it, you were promptly smacked by cop with a baton.

Bret 21:13
Yeah. cop knock me down with a baton. You had to you know, come up.

Heather 21:18
You think I was do it? Remember? Good say? No, I'm, I think I would remember that.

Bret 21:24
I think you would do. Yeah.

Heather 21:26
So you've had your bike with

Bret 21:27
you? Like, no, I was on foot. foot. I was moving. The crowd was moving towards the Berkeley campus. And I was moving with them. And I ran into this guy, but I you know, I remember other people get smacked down just you know, no, I don't think was personally. It was awful. Yeah. But and it alerted me to this sort of sense, which is, you know, it was the first place that I really understood. Okay. All I had to do to be this cops enemy. was to just be in favor of this cause in March of this direction. Yeah. This has nothing to do with my behavior. Right? I was just I

Heather 21:58
wasn't, it was a peaceful protest. You were marching towards the campus. You said, yeah, it was a loud, peaceful protest. Okay. But loud, like, angry, louder musical loud, chanting loud. matters. So

Bret 22:09
it was a I mean, you know, it's a long time ago. It's Yeah, my memory is dim, but I would say it's, it was loud and angry. Okay. But it was what it was. Nonetheless, I didn't you know, I didn't threaten anybody. I wasn't breaking anything. I was just going in that direction. And so anyway, that was that. Yeah.

Heather 22:28
Yeah. So you said, well, there were two. Joe said, What were they? And you said, Well, the first one is a long story from my first research gig in Jamaica. And you then skip to the next one, and it didn't come back up. But I'm thinking you might want to tell that story. Because this one I know

Bret 22:45
this is the revenge best serve live, isn't it? You're gonna have me tell that story here.

Heather 22:49
This is not revenge. No, I don't think I mean, I think it's, it's fascinating. I think I at least watched that and thought, Oh, I know the star and I still want to hear it.

Bret 22:59
Alright. Well, let me see if I can put the story back together. So I was, I guess it would have been 20

Heather 23:08
This is when this is when you were you spent seven weeks in Jamaica with Bob trimmers. Yeah.

Bret 23:12
Bob rivers is a great evolutionary biologist who's a good friend of ours Actually, he was the officiant at our wedding. Yep. After long after this event, but so

Heather 23:21
this would have been 90 probably 1990 fall of 1990 to fall of 1990. So you would have been 2121 years

Bret 23:29
22. Okay, so I was in Jamaica, extended period of time, I did not know in what manner I would be staying. I was 91. Sorry, probably 9191. Okay, so I went with Bob to help him with research on lizards that he was doing. Bob is a guy of European descent. But he prefers to live with black people. He identifies as black before that was ever a thing. So anyway, he lives in Jamaica, and he was married to a Jamaican woman. He's divorced, but he has kids with her. And so he's still a member of their family. And anyway, I went down to research with him. And I arrived and he picked me up at the airport. And I, at that point, discovered, in what way I would be living in Jamaica, he just said he would take care of it. And he told me a thing. And it turned out that I was living with his family that one of the daughters of the family was away in the states with her husband. And so her room was free. And I stayed in in her room. And,

Heather 24:32
and this is his mother in law's house, right? Yep. misses his former his former mother in law, as needing

Bret 24:40
Yeah. And I would say in some sense, one of the many things I learned from my time in Jamaica was that effectively the divorce Bob that Bob's divorced from the daughter didn't really change anything because they were related through the grandkids. And so anyway, so Bob

Heather 24:54
is still part of the family, even though he and the daughter no longer had a romantic relationship.

Bret 24:58
Right? Exactly. So, in any case, I was staying in her room and the this family,

Heather 25:06
so I'm sorry. Yeah, you weren't staying in Bob's former wife's room. You're saying one of the other daughter's room one

Bret 25:11
of the other daughter's rooms right now. And so anyway, can make us warm climate. This is by the way off in the country, right? This is in Southfield, Jamaica, which the only place that you might know about if you're not from Jamaica that you would have heard of that was anywhere nearby. As lovers leap. Lovers leap is a famous VISTA where I think two people were supposed to have committed suicide together lovers who couldn't be together. And there may actually be an interaction with slavery and that story, which I've now forgotten, but in any case, lover's leap is a famous place Southfield is near it. And when I was in Southfield, it was primitive enough that there was no phone, I had to I brought a bike with me. So I could ride to the junction to call you, since you and I were already involved and committed to each other. And so I had to have a bicycle to get to the junction, because there was going to be no other way to make contact with you regularly. So anyway, and that was 10 or 15 miles away. I don't know what the state of technology is there, I would imagine it's changed a lot. But in any case,

Heather 26:10
probably as we saw firsthand in Madagascar that cell phones moved in, and then landlines ever happened. So probably people have cell phones

Bret 26:19
that could well be could well be when happening. It's a good prediction. But anyway, so I was staying in this house and the house is a house, but the kitchen is outside. There's technically running water, which involves pumping water that's collected from rain off the roofs out of a big pool under a big pool, collects water off the roofs, and then you pump it into an air tank above the house. And then that feeds the running water. But for some reason that wasn't up and running. But they're you know, they're outhouses, and you took a shower by dropping a bucket into these big pools, and you tried not to knock the bottom out of the bucket when you did it. Which was difficult. But anyway, you would do that, and you'd pour water over your head to shower. And anyway, it was that kind of thing. But the yard was basically the center of a community. Right? This was a this was a it was a clan, a group of people who were affiliated in one way or another, not just the family itself. And I became good friends with Lexi, and prince who were somewhere near my age. And anyway, it was very interesting to be, you know, to be friends with people who were living such different lives. But anyway, we got along really well. And it was a tremendous amount of fun. So here's we get to the difficult part of the story. This time in my life, I smoked pot pretty regularly. And I was in Jamaica. And pot is very unsynchronized in Jamaica, and I wanted to have some, and I didn't want to be sourcing it a little bit at a time. So I it was also what

Heather 28:00
I just had this image of of that being pulled, I wanted to have some, and I didn't want to source it a little bit at a time.

Bret 28:08
Well, don't forget, this was your idea for me to tell the story. So anyway, so pot was cheap, there wasn't especially good. It's what we would call ditch weed, right? But it was plentiful. And so anyway, I. So you could either buy it a little bit at a time, or you could buy way more than I was going to need. So anyway, I think I threw 100 bucks at the problem or something. And I ended up with 10 times what I would have needed. And so I I had maybe an ounce of it. And I had given the rest to my friend Lexi. And anyway, I was there and things were good. And I was researching with Bob and I was learning a ton about how other people exist in the world and all of this and about lizards, and about lizards. And as my time and to make it was drawing to a close one night, I had gone to bed just like I would any other night. And really late like two in the morning would be my recollection. I hear a very loud thud. And I wake up and I think I don't know what that is. And suddenly I hear a lot of shouting. And there are men streaming into the house. And these officers obviously police officers dressed fully in riot gear military gear. They were heavily armed, multiple automatic weapons are coming through shouting about something. I have no idea what the hell is going on. I'm just sitting there stunned, right? I didn't. I mean Frankly, I probably hadn't seen a cop in Southfield it just was you know, it was a little outpost somewhere and suddenly these cops from who knows where. And anyway, one of them comes into my room and he I cannot do it to make it accents very difficult accents you know there's one white brother in here and and then there's like a commotion What does this mean anything like that. So anyway I'm sitting there and he's standing in the doorway and it's clear that I'm supposed to stay still and I stay perfectly still. And they go streaming into the other rooms and I'm afraid because although pot is not a prosecutor defense in general in Jamaica, it's still illegal, right? And I know that there's probably half an ounce of pot under my bed. Right? And you know, a little paper bag. And anyway, they kind of search the room, haphazardly

Heather 30:40
and you still have no idea why they're there. I

Bret 30:41
have no idea. I'm just I don't I can't even imagine because there's nothing there's nothing about this family or at

Heather 30:50
this point you have any idea how the rest of the family is doing right like you're you're trapped in your room the COP is saying you stay here are you making it clear all pinned down? But everyone's pinned down and you don't hear commotion doesn't sound like people are being dragged off but you can't.

Bret 31:03
And so. Okay, so they cop does a cursory search, I think I detect that he does not find what is under my bed and I breathe kind of half a sigh of relief. And they go into the next room over which is Lexi's and boom, they find the pot under his bed or wherever it was, or whatever. And they lead him out in handcuffs. And, you know, I'm thinking Holy crap, what's going on here? And so anyway, the cops finished their search of the house they're messy and raucous and you know, they're probably and they

Heather 31:37
destructive.

Bret 31:39
They're definitely like, they they turn the place over. But I don't know that they don't break stuff. Yeah, not intentionally.

Heather 31:47
I mean, they break they break non physical things. Yeah, they break trust and such

Bret 31:52
and there must have been you know, we got a glimpse, it must have been 10 or 15. Cops several vehicles. It was crazy. So anyway, they stream out and they take Lexie with them. And you know, in handcuffs and they disappear into the night and we're

Heather 32:07
Lexi is one of how many young men at the house at this point? Well, that's the thing other than you.

Bret 32:12
So Lexi, and Prince would have been the two you know, older guys. Bob son Johnny was there but he's young. He's young. He's quite young. So anyway, it was me and

Heather 32:25
I'm like, because we met and spend some time with Johnny when he lived with Bob and Santa Cruz for a while. A couple of year laters like he was like 11 or 12 Yeah, he was still a kid so

Bret 32:33
So anyway, Lexi and Prince were there but Prince was actually staying at the neighbor's house house sitting so he wasn't there.

Heather 32:42
And he was the only young Jamaican man Yeah, yeah. So okay, so we're only only Jamaican man gets gets taken off in handcuffs.

Bret 32:51
And anyway, we're looking at each other thinking what what just happened? And

Heather 32:56
we like the women of the house and you Ronnie

Bret 32:59
and yes Giannini and maybe there was a woman Karen who didn't live right there but she may have come over but anyway we're looking at each other not quite sure what to make of this why it's happened what's going to happen to Lexi we don't know and so anyway as soon as we get our bearings Johnny and I decided that we have to go tell Prince what's going on you know his best friend has been hauled off and you know, whatever it just the next imperative thing is that he knows what's going on so Johnny and I head off and you know, the houses are probably 150 200 meters apart they're not right close to each other. And anyway, we walk off across the night and my recollection is we get to the door of the house where princess house sitting and I'm like, mid knock, and hands grab me away from the door and suddenly I find myself up against the wall facing these cops. They were

Heather 33:59
going to how did you like how did you not know they were there? Well, that's the thing were they were they

Bret 34:06
quiet somehow? Yeah, either. They were they saw us coming and hit maybe they'd left the cars I don't I don't know what they had done. But for some reason. We were there stealth. Yeah, so they grabbed Johnny and me. And Johnny to yes kit. Oh, yeah. And they have us up against the wall. And I realized oh shit, I had just thrown on clothing from you know, the day before and in my pocket. There's a joint and a lighter and the COP is searching me. And he reaches into my pocket, and he steals my lighter and misses to join.

Heather 34:49
All right, letters may be a rare commodity in Southfield.

Bret 34:53
They are a fairly rare commodity. As you know it's an object of value. So anyway, I breathed another sigh of relief and The cop is being rough with me. Yes, roughing me

Heather 35:03
up a little bit rough with Johnny to as far as you know,

Bret 35:06
yeah, both of us. And I am not happy to be roughed up I. And so I'm trying to reason with him. I later have a conversation with Bob about what I should have done. But nonetheless, I'm trying to reason with them, I'm trying to be decent, and all of the things that you would do to get a cop to stop doing this to you, and it's not working. And at some point, I curse into making an eye. So I say Ross Clark, right. And the cop knocks me to the ground, right? Boom, right?

Heather 35:37
His arms are dizzy, he grabs

Bret 35:39
me and throws me. And I'm stunned. This is not a normal occurrence in any way. I kind of get back up and he tells me to stay there quietly, and they go in and they searched the house and they don't think they find anything in this house. And they don't so they don't take prints away. They don't take prints away, and then they disappear into the night and they're gone.

Heather 36:03
Okay, so you think stealthwatch right here knows what they're hiding is back to the house. And we confer and again, you talked to prints to Yeah, absolutely. I think at this point, and this is the moment for me to ask you what Bob told you you should have done or do you want to do? Oh, yeah. So what is Bob saying later, you should have done before you continue? Oh,

Bret 36:20
he said I should have gone into upstanding American citizen proper English mode, that I should have basically not tried to be of the population I should have emphasized being outside of it.

Heather 36:40
That that's telling Yes, it is tell us you know, basically basically he's saying, you know, this is a man who has lived with an among and as family in Jamaica, most of his adult life who's basically saying, as you have use your privilege honorably use it when you can, so that you can help those who don't have it

Bret 37:03
just as long as we're here and since these things are on Wikipedia anyway. Bob Trevor's was a Black Panther. There's some story that I think I don't know about why he was I think he was kicked out of the Black Panthers for his own good. But But

Heather 37:18
I think he was still in the Black Panthers at the point that he actually had as a graduate student and graduated with a PhD Huey P Newton. Huey Newton was hit had a PhD in biology I'm going to tutelage of Bob drovers

Bret 37:31
evolutionary bio Yeah, yes. I think that was after the Panthers he knew he remained close okay. And so anyway,

Heather 37:41
he remained close with the Newton family as we saw when we were friends when we were living in the same place with him in the early 90s long after Well, at least somewhat after Newton had been killed. Yeah,

Bret 37:51
so his admonition was not it was a practical piece of advice Yeah, it was not out of love for the police because obviously the tension between the Black Panthers and the police was intense and at this point you know at the point he's giving us advice you we knew it was already dead for years so

Heather 38:12
Okay, so you and Johnny go back to the house

Bret 38:15
we gather ourselves and eventually we go back to bed cuz there's nothing to do you right it's happened and we will find out the night later there's no there's not even any weird way to call anybody no no really know where to go right right so it's just over yeah and so anyway go back to bed the next day we get up into answer

Heather 38:30
and Bob goes Bob doesn't know Bob's Bob stinks

Bret 38:33
to say this Bob actually had gone sorry Bob.

Heather 38:38
Bob's Bob's lovely

Bret 38:40
Bob now Bob. Bob had gone to give a talk I really hope it's okay to say this I think it's public record I think Bob has talked about it if you went to the CIA the CIA was interested in his work on deceit and self deception and he does not feel you know, I don't get any love of the CIA but something I felt like he was giving up any important secrets in fact i

Heather 39:02
mean he's published his work on deceit and self deception it's out there so

Bret 39:06
he before he left he he was very proud of this joke that he was by lecturing on deceit and self deception to the CIA was taking coals to Newcastle it's a pretty good very good

Heather 39:18
yeah that laid the the idea that the cops stole your your lighter from you reminded me of one of Bob's examples of self deception in his in his work on the subject which he reports that he is constantly stealing lighters from himself as leaving himself bereft of lighters right.

Bret 39:34
Okay, so let me try to recall the order of events. I think the next thing that happens is gonna be the next morning you guys wait. Yeah, I think so. I'm now closing in on my leave date for your Mac I have my ticket out. And so we're in the last couple days and I think the next thing that happens is I go I'm make a point of going to the jail where Lexi has been taken to see him I'm not going to see him otherwise, and he and I become friends and I just didn't want to leave the island, not saying goodbye to him. And so anyway, I, wherever the jail was, it was in one of the towns not too far away, you know, 3040 miles away, maybe. And somehow I, maybe I got Uncle vernie to drive me in Bob's car as a car and goods

Heather 40:21
held together with duct tape.

Bret 40:24
As long as we're doing this, let's let's take this a little detour. So among the many shocking lessons of my time in Jamaica, was that there was a kind of inferiority complex among Jamaicans about the capacity that people that they saw coming from the US and other mainland countries had, right there was a sense of inferiority. But from my perspective, I was around people who had tremendous ingenuity to be able to do things when they didn't necessarily have the right part, right, you couldn't just source stuff and so they were tremendously ingenious at solving problems that in the states you know, you would bring your car somewhere and they would just replace a part in Jamaica, they might have to fashion apart or if they couldn't fashion a part they'd have to Cluj some solution to make the car run anyway and they were constantly doing this and so anyway, look the opposite to me. But there was something about the razzle dazzle nature of the you know, the gadgets and techniques and the ease with which things work when you have exactly the right tool rather than not exactly the right tool that had left them with the wrong impression.

Heather 41:29
I'm reminded of the story from our first long trip to Central America with my what 1976 Toyota Corolla and the trip would have been in 1993 so this is you know, not a new car and I never had it when it was new Of course, and the alternator broke I mean, so many things broke on that car, but the alternator broke at one point we were still in northern Mexico. And we ended up flagging down someone who had a ability to tow it to the nearest place near his town. And we said there's not gonna be a new alternator here right? How

Bret 42:02
long are we stuck? How

Heather 42:03
long are we stuck in this we don't even know where we are, you know, Northern central desert Mexico. And the guy said Are you kidding me? I rebuild them. And at that point 93 I think that was I can't wait 91 that would have been actually 91 as well I would have been right before then you then went to Jamaica with Bob you know he laughed at us like why don't why don't use new officers we rebuild alternators and there was as far as I know almost no one rebuilding alternators in the US at that oh right it was it couldn't be done but most people had lost the skill

Bret 42:36
no no in fact there was a mechanism you would take your old alternator in and you would get 10 bucks back on your new alternator and it was just you know a chord chart

Heather 42:44
and we would rebuild it just on this little little deviation here I don't remember what he charged us in cash but it was quite low but he also we you know we had the car completely packed because we were going to be on the road for the summer and we didn't know where it was going to take us and one of the things we had was one of these like Costco sized cans of almonds and so he asked for payment in cash plus the almonds So yeah, those almond that's

Bret 43:07
the family size cost allowance. Yeah, probably still have those moments.

Heather 43:12
I believe at least the cat I'm sure the cat is being used.

Bret 43:15
Yep. Okay, so anyway, I go and I see Lexie and the scene is a little frightening actually, Lexi's a very robust dude. But he's a little shaken right and he's in a

Heather 43:28
concrete set the scene for the jail is he is he alone in the cell alone

Bret 43:32
in a cell it's kind of a big cell but he's alone yourselves concrete awful mattress and not much more beyond that but I talked to him I sit down with them they let me in and I talked to him and he tells me that they've got him cleaning the marijuana that they're lifting off of people of the stems and the seeds so that they can resell right so that's how corrupt this police department

Heather 44:01
and as he come to understand that the at least the excuse the cover story for them arresting him was because he was in possession of marijuana.

Bret 44:08
Oh no, no, oh no. What I think the story was that a I don't even know why there was a rival family I saw no evidence of you know, I saw a little bit of interpersonal conflict sometimes in Jamaica and it was sometimes you know, I learned interpersonal conflict in Jamaica is a bit louder than it is you know, in the US usually but but anyway, all of it pretty good natured and, and affectionate. So I wasn't aware that there was any tension. I never saw it between clans effectively, right? Yeah, but somebody apparently reported that the family I was staying with had been involved in some sort of a theft of goods from a store which I guarantee you didn't happen there were no goods. Yeah. And they wouldn't have done it right. It was just didn't happen. But they came looking for that stuff and having failed to find it. And they did find pot and that was technically illegal. They used it for a laboratory or something.

Heather 45:00
Okay, I don't want to waste a good suiting up in the right gear.

Bret 45:04
I mean, every time I've set it up in riot gear, I have made sure to find some sort of an infraction, to arrest people for Yeah. Okay, so anyway, I see Lexie, we say goodbye. And I go back to Southfield. And there's an errand that Bob has left, I'm just gonna ride along, but I think it's uncle Bernie has to go to the, to the hardware store to pick up some funds for some workers who are working on Bob's house that he's building down there. And so anyway, Bernie goes into the hardware store, and I'm sitting in the car, and a Jamaican guy seems nice enough, comes up to the window and asked me if I'm interested in smoking a joint. And this isn't so unusual to usual.

Heather 45:46
Are you Bob's at CIA at this point? Are you the only white guy?

Bret 45:51
I'm the only white guy probably for 10 or 20 miles in any direction? Okay,

Heather 45:55
so I'm in Bob, on the average day, the only only person of European descent, you see is Bob, and he's not even in country at this point. Right?

Bret 46:02
Okay. Which is a very interesting experience. And among the many things I learned is that that turns one of the tables, but not both of them, right? So it turns the table of Yeah, you're actually the minority, and you feel it. But the white person is a powerful minority, they're understood to be powerful. And, you know, this has all kinds of implications that I find profoundly disturbing, like the celebration of lighter skinned children. But, you know, I'm an evolutionary biologist, I can also tell you why that is. The fact is, in a world in which, you know, there is something called white privilege, or something that would be called white privilege, if that term wasn't being borrowed and abused, lighter skinned children have opportunities that others might not. And so, you know, it makes sense for people to root for such things, because it might give you a leg up in situation where you would otherwise not get anywhere, so

Heather 46:54
no. And the fact is that, even when you are a minority of one in your skin and a place when your skin looks like yours, or mine, you can always choose and at any moment, you may choose, you may choose to do justice to go back to the place where you are not the minority. And you know, I experienced this in Madagascar, we did as well, but the time that I was there, without you, I really felt it very acutely. That Okay, it is yes, whenever I walk down the street, I'm, you know, the only white person for their, you know, hundreds of miles aside from Jessica, my field assistant, and people are intrigued and enchanted and scared and horrified. And in northeast Madagascar, one of the myths is that the monster, the demon that comes and eats children comes in the form of a white woman. So occasionally people like children are actually deathly afraid, because I've never seen one before. And you know how that myths started in a world without colonialism? I don't know. Yeah. You know, because you know, Madagascar's myths are far older than than the colonial influence of the French. But the fact is that at any moment, I could have left you just as you could have left, and you did, right. Well,

Bret 48:04
which brings me to the next part of the story. Excellent. I'm sitting there in Bob's car, I've, this guy has come up who I don't know, offered to smoke a joint with me. I probably should have said no, but I didn't have a reason to say no. And so he gets in the car and he rolls a joint and we're smoking it and he starts talking about where I'm from. And I, you know, I tell him and I say, you know, I say I'm headed back in a couple days. And he offers to get me a large amount of pot to take back to the States. And I say, Nope, no, thank you, sir. No, thank you. He says, Are you sure? And I say yeah, I'm sure I have no interest in that. And immediately, cops in riot gear, descend on the car, they yank him out of the car, they appear to rough him up and throw him into the back of a vehicle at which point they come to me. And they pull me out of the car. And they start giving me a very hard time lonelier with Uncle ferny No uncle Bernie is in the hardware store. He doesn't see any of you doesn't see any of this. So I'm out there. The cop is giving me a hard time and they start searching the car. I have no idea what's in this car. Lots of people use this car. I don't know what's about to happen, right? But anyway, they searched the car. They don't find anything. And the cop tells me that I am hanging out with the wrong people. And I say, I don't think they're the wrong people. I think they're very good people. I really, I think they're excellent people. I think you're making a mistake. He said, You're wrong. You're hanging out with the wrong people. And I say and he says and you have to stop and I say I am leaving Jamaica in Two days and he said, That's too long. You have to go tonight. Wow. And then they drove off

Heather 50:08
with the guy who had tried to get you to take a bunch of dread tried to. Yes, to get out to agree to take part.

Bret 50:15
I believe I was being set up. Yeah, thanks. But in any case, they drive off and they tell me that I have to leave tonight. I don't really have a good mechanism for even doing that. Right. But I more or less decide that's a bluff. And I return to the house and I you know,

Heather 50:36
do what I was planning to do. Tell a tell your friends you tell? Oh, yeah, Ernie. Oh, yeah.

Bret 50:40
Tell everybody. And anyway, so I proceed with my plans as they were scheduled. And I fly out without incident. Without further and without further Yeah, not entirely without incident. But

Heather 50:54
Alexi, Lexi's released

Bret 50:57
weeks later. Now I believe he spent a good bit of time in jail for an offense that was not an offense that nobody would have thought twice about, except the police

Heather 51:08
doing unpaid work that was itself part of the same

Bret 51:12
offense. Right, exactly. So anyway, that story has a lot of depth to it. And I guess this is the the end of my public life. So anyway, it's been great. And

Heather 51:24
no, that's, that's, that's fabulous. And there. There are a lot more places to go with that. But I think it's, it's important to, I see why you didn't want to go there was with Joe, because it's a long story. And you can definitely get dragged into a lot of things that maybe you had, you had more important things to talk about. But the fact that you have experienced, you know, abuse at the hands of police and watched your friends be abused and known that they were living a life that they could not escape that at any moment, any of them and yeah, they weren't. I assumed, yes, you told me the story at the time when you got back. But I assumed without asking that, of course, they weren't roughing up women. Yeah, they wouldn't see that. Right. And yeah, I'm sure there are occasionally women, you know, maybe more. So now, who were involved in what the police would view as nefarious behaviors, and some of them really are. And so sometimes they do get roughed up. But in general, it's gonna be, you know, active, right? geared police raiding houses, it's going to be men, mostly young men, who are going to be treated badly. Yeah. And you, you got off once, maybe because they didn't find anything. Maybe also they weren't looking as hard because you were white? Who knows? Well, but

Bret 52:43
I don't know. I mean, I've thought a lot about what this meant, what they were hoping to accomplish. I can't really imagine that they were going to pin something on me and I was going to end up in a Jamaican prison. Right? If I had been dumb enough, this is

Heather 52:59
your skin privilege. This is your nationality privilege. The US government we just not have

Bret 53:03
it's not well, it might but it's not worth the international incident. So my guess would be maybe, I don't know, maybe they were hoping to extract some cash. I mean, I don't I get the impression they did cash means that I was there until they happened on me unexpectedly during their initial rape. I sort of have the sense that it was organic until that moment, and then something changed. But But I don't

Heather 53:26
know, there's something I mean, that's, that's important, too, right? That the dehumanization of the people on the other side, be it the police or you know, whatever, or you know, or the protesters or whatever group it is, actually requires that we imagine that they have simple rules, and that they live by their pure principles at all moments, when in fact, under times of duress, especially, especially if not perfectly trained, as we know the police worldwide not to be perfectly trained. There are going to be snap decisions that aren't the ones that if you ask them in, in in calm, measured voices when they aren't under arrest, what would you do? different decisions are made this is when poor decision making happens. And that's not an excuse, or justification, but rather an explanation in part.

Bret 54:14
Yep. So I should say, actually, one of the reasons I'm a little reluctant to tell the story, and I guess the deed is done now is I certainly assume that, you know, 30 years later, that there's no harm to come from this, those officers have long since moved on. Presumably, everybody gets that the story is ancient history, but I really did value my time living in Jamaica, it gave me a window into Yes, how Jamaicans live and how this particular family live, but also just a correction, you know, until you live in another culture. You only have your own experience to go by. And so this was so eye opening and so important as a formative experience that I, you know, I cherish it and, and I, I value, all of the interactions that I had and all of the people that I was living with who treated me so well, you know, if in the US, if you brought somebody into your house study abroad like, right, you would do your best to be gracious to them. But it would not be as warm and decent as what I experienced among people who had really no reason to care for me, right?

Heather 55:34
At some level, they, they cared for you both because they loved Bob, and they trusted him. And he wasn't bringing through a whole host of people like you, he didn't have a research assistant every year like you were there working with him that year. And I'm just totally guessing here, but you know, maybe one year and five, maybe he would bring someone down to work with them, right? So this was rare. This wasn't just a constant sort of circulating tribe of random undergraduates from the US. But also, you know, you were real with them, and you were living in their home, and you were legitimately befriending, and you're enjoying the food. And, you know, not complaining about the fact that you were showering with a bucket that you had to dip into a pool, like, you know, like, I've lived with you in those situations and other places. And I like I know for sure you didn't complain, you know, even if it wasn't, you know, optimal, but especially again, yeah, this is I think you were there for seven weeks. And it's everything for seven weeks, everything is still just amazing. Even, you know, the legitimate hardships of life, where you don't have functional running water or reliable electricity. And oh, by the way, the cops in riot gear may suddenly show up when your demon No, the cops were present. Those things are we live, Zach? So okay. You were you were learning from every single thing that you were you were doing down there. And yeah, this is this is actually this is one of the things we used to say to our students, when we would do study abroad is, you know, yes, we are going to be studying evolution in ecology, animal behavior in tropical biology, and philosophy of science, and statistics, and all of these things. But part of the reason to go is that we are now going to be living in someone else's culture, among other people, and we hope to, you know, we require that you be respectful and understand that you are guests in their culture at home, but we hope that you can manage to befriend, and you know, learn to admire the different ways that different people do things and understand, you know, the ways in which your life as Americans is actually privileged and unique. And the ways that Americans got it wrong to you know, what are we lost? With all of the resources that we've got, you know, this is something that was said to me and to us in Madagascar a few times, you know, the observation from people that Yeah, you Americans, which, you know, they saw very, very few Americans to the degree they signed a visa and he white people, it was mostly French people, you Americans seem to show up with lots of stuff, meaning we had boots and backpacks like, you know, lots of stuff meant just that we could, you know, put shoes on our feet. But you may not have the family connections that we have.

Bret 58:18
Oh, right. And you, you know, there's also an exchange of wisdom that I thought was really profound. So I recall, I often invoke uncle Bernie uncle Bernie was a great guy as a mechanic. Yeah. And he was one of these guys who was just, you know, super capable of figuring out a solution when the thing that you you know, when the a level solution wasn't available, he had, you know, B through Z, you know, somewhere in his arsenal, but I remember one day I was trying to I was trying to lubricate my bicycle chain and I didn't have by chain lubricant, and he brought me some corn oil. And I was like, I'm not so sure. Brett the wrong lubricant is better than no lubricant. And to this day, and there's there's a couple of instances where that's not true, like the poles have a ratchet but because if you put a lubricant that is too thick, they can stick but in most cases, you know, there might be a best lubricant but what you really need is something to lubricate the things otherwise to rub together and, and terribly the apparatus part. But anyway, there's that but then there was also the other thing, which I found, I still think about it a lot, which is, there was this gaggle of kids who range from very, very young like, like three, three, yeah, two kids who were maybe, you know, 12 1314. And they were, they were really fond of me because I would answer the questions and they had a lot of bad information coming to them all A lot of it over, you know, TV and stuff. Bad info. And

Heather 1:00:04
American TV is what they're being exposed to us.

Bret 1:00:06
Yeah. Now they find they find me confusing because I frequently tell them, I don't understand what they're asking me because they speak in patois, and my patois is weak. And they don't even recognize the kids don't that they speak to language code, switch code switching between school English, and patois.

Heather 1:00:26
And so school English is not patois. It's American English. It's

Bret 1:00:29
American English. Yes, with a British accent. But But anyway, it's. So this gaggle of kids was, you know, they were constantly following me around. And I remember, I was reading the Unbearable Lightness of Being yank was my book that I was reading. Yes. And there was a point at which I think it may be the end of the book. I hope I'm remembering this correctly, where there's a scene where they have to euthanize their own dog. And I knew I was gonna cry. And I wanted to be alone. But this gag would not, they would not take the hint. And so everywhere I found a quiet place, like kids would descend. So anyway,

Heather 1:01:12
so what I don't remember was one of the kids or someone else who asked you is the moon that we see in Jamaica? The same moon that you see in the United States? Yeah, that was Prince? That's a great question. Yeah. And it just it points. You know, there's there's honest inquiry there. And, you know, unless you too can answer all the questions on that list that you made about why the seasons and why the solstice and why the two tides and all of this Yeah, don't feel superior to someone asking a question like that, just because that happens to be one of the things that managed to get through education, you know, get through to you in education.

Bret 1:01:46
Oh, and especially, you know, I remember being kind of dismayed. At one point, I found a copy of the weekly World News. And the problem is weekly World News. Looks like a newspaper. It's one of these tabloids? Oh, it's Yeah, it was the most ridiculous of Okay, no, I think the particular issue I was looking at a woman had given birth to an otter or something. I mean, just nonsense, right? It's lizard people before it's time. Yeah, exactly. And so anyway, you've got just garbagey information that in the US, you would know to discount, but it shows up looking like a newspaper in a place where they don't even have they're not connected by phones, there's no way to correct bad info and so

Heather 1:02:27
but high literacy. So you know, that something like that falls into people's hands, and they actually don't take it in, which is actually, you know, potentially a downside of literacy in a place without good written word.

Bret 1:02:38
Yeah, you don't we don't think of that downside of literacy. But, but it potentially is one. But anyway, so the thing, you know, prints This question was a good one until, you know, for sure, I mean, very distantly separated places, but there's, you know, led to several different discussions, because, okay, it's the same moon, is the phase the same, right? Well, if you think about it, why is the face the same? It takes you a second to put together why that would be and you know, anyway, we could go down that rabbit hole when we shouldn't but

Heather 1:03:06
yeah. Well, I think we are over an hour already. And there were many other things that we wanted to talk

Bret 1:03:14
about, but maybe we have not talked about any of the horror in the world. No, we

Heather 1:03:18
haven't, but maybe, you know, maybe we should leave it. Well, I have this one quotation from James Baldwin that I wanted to finish with. But given that we've gone for an hour, and we'll be back on Tuesday, and we'll do a q&a. livestream. Right after this, you want to say just a couple words, let's just

Bret 1:03:37
Can we take a quick show of hands? Are you guys alright with that plan? Terrific. Yeah.

Heather 1:03:47
Well, I guess I'll say, Okay, well, we'll save logistics for when sex got the screen up. But so James Baldwin, who is an extraordinary writer and thinker was he's he's dead now. had this to say, very short quote, but it seems like it's a nice finish to us talking about the solstice to begin. He says life is tragic, simply because the Earth turns and the sun inexorably rises and sets and one day for each of us, the sun will go down for the last last time. Perhaps the whole root of our trouble. The human trouble is that we will sacrifice all the beauty of our lives will imprison ourselves and totems, taboos crosses, blood sacrifices, steeples, mosques, races, armies, flags nations, in order to deny the fact of death, the only fact we have, it seems to me that one ought to rejoice in the fact of death, or to decide indeed, to earn one's death by confronting with passion, the conundrum of life. What is responsible for life? It is the small beacon in that terrifying darkness from which we come into which we shall return. Wow. Yeah. So that's, that's Baldwin.

Bret 1:05:00
As incredibly powerful it is. All right, on that note, so

Heather 1:05:06
we have just a couple of logistics things here we're going we're going to pick up super chat questions as we always do from this hour prioritizing by dollar amount. And then for the second half of the q&a, we will look at subject questions that come in in the next hour in the order that they come in. And we will miss some good ones. And for that, we apologize, but we never are going to do all of them. We have created a, what we're calling for now a dark horse membership on my Patreon, a private q&a a month for people who sign up at the $5 level or higher, which it looks like I put a poll up so unless a lot more people sign up and change it looks like it's probably going to be on the last Sunday of the month this month on June 28. So if you are interested in that, you can go over to my Patreon and sign up again. I feel like there was something else but I forgotten I

Bret 1:05:56
don't know. Well, if we figure out what it is we can pick it up at the beginning of the livestream q&a which will start in about 15 minutes. Meantime, be well

This transcript was generated by https://otter.ai