Bret 0:14
Hey folks, welcome to the Dark Horse podcast live stream number 76. It is pandemonium here we have gone out into Portland to see how things have changed overnight and it has caused chaos. But we are here with you to discuss what is going on. And its relevance to you know the future if there is one.

Heather 0:33
Indeed Today we are going to talk some about Portland about our hometown, which we still love. And and we know that most of the people living here love it too. And therefore we have to wonder over and over again, why what is happening is being allowed to happen. So we're going to talk something some about what's happening. Unfortunately, we did not have the time to get all of our pictures and video totally organized. This is not right. But we're going to show some of those to you. And for those of you listening only will describe what we're showing. Then we are going to talk about some of the numbers and stories from this week. We got number three, but number 90, and number 13. And the number 2.5 billion.

Bret 1:13
I'm concerned about the number 13 2.5 billion I can handle. But 13 has always been rough.

Heather 1:18
Now 2.5 billion is a familiar kind of cozy feeling number, not to me, telling me No, it's sort of I think, I think you're gonna feel differently once you hear why 2.5 billion is in the news. No,

Bret 1:27
no. But kinesthetically speaking in sort of a color of mov I've never liked kinesthetically. Yes, really kinesthetic? That's not the term what's the term? I don't know what you're trying to say, no, it sounds like synesthetic. That's what I meant. Yes. And aesthetically, I would say I don't have synesthesia. But if I did, it would be a color of mom that I just, I can't tolerate.

Heather 1:45
Well, this is a conversation for another time. But as you know, I have long thought that we all start out with some degree of synesthesia that we are sort of part of what childhood is, is learning how to separate our senses and catalog them as as separate entities, sometimes to our detriment, and also that there is persistent synesthesia, that can come out in particular situations. And in fact, I think I wrote about that a little bit in the in the essay I wrote about having been mugged at knifepoint in Quito,

Bret 2:20
right? Yes, you did.

Heather 2:23
Anyway, then we're going to talk about a lizard that isn't the lizard and coyote is

Bret 2:27
the lizard, not a lizard. That's such an odd thing to happen. So I'm looking forward to

Heather 2:31
that we're gonna find out. So first first announcements, announcements. Yes, announcements that's traditional Yeah, no ads today. And but at my patreon right now the 48 hour window is open to ask questions for the two hour private q&a that we do every month on the last Sunday of the month at 11am Pacific so if you have been thinking about perhaps doing that now is a good moment to join and then all the rest of the things are generally true if you're enjoying this subscribe like all of that definitely like definitely like yeah all right. All right. Should we

Heather 3:09
should Portland is gorgeous, especially this week.

Heather 3:13
Oh my goodness. I think any one of the Pacific Northwest I suspect right now is having this just amazing weather unseasonable warm nine to hot really blue skies. The trees are beginning to leaf out you know many of the trees magnolias in the cherries are still in full bloom. The birds are in mating season so there's a lot of song going on. It is just a stunning, stunning moment in Portland, and actually

Bret 3:41
it is usual on because the leaves are not yet out. The flowers are in bloom and the weather is so clear. We're not dealing with our typical coolish drizzly weather that we would ordinarily so right

Heather 3:53
well but no in the summer we usually get this kind of weather but the plants are in a different phase. The birds are in a different phase. So this is like August weather with April ecology and it's kind of amazing. It really is. So it's you know, it's it's bringing out. Let's bring out the coyotes which we'll talk we talked about last week and we'll talk about the end of the hour here and it's bringing a we're have begun to attract Steller's Jays just just glorious and it's brought out the riders.

Bret 4:23
Yes, riders right on the streets. It's a very hospitable weather condition. And

Heather 4:29
absolutely What else you got to do. What's all the festivals are shut down?

Bret 4:32
Sure. Writing is is what's happening. Yeah. Yeah. So let's talk a little bit about it. Let us To be honest, it's a little unclear exactly what the riots in Portland are about because there's a national Riot phenomenon that has seen an uptick as a result, ostensibly have a couple of shootings in various places, including Chicago. And we also had a shooting here in Portland yesterday about which there's not a lot of information. And then cautious because early reports are always wrong. And these aren't early reports Exactly. But still there, the full information isn't out. But it sounds like a white guy seemingly mentally unstable, waving a firearm in a park was shot and killed by police. And so the pattern that we have increasingly seen is that any shooting at all by police is taken to be a validation of the model in which the police are simply out of control and shooting people willy nilly. And when race can be invoked, it is and when it can't, it's quietly sidelined. And the fact is it's completely tautological framework, because the fact is, there are a lot of police and frankly, there are a lot of citizens, and there's a lot of crime, and there's going to be there are going to be shootings that are valid, there are going to be shootings that are errors, there is no way you could do policing that would be perfect in this regard. And so if what you do is simply take every time somebody is shot by police as evidence that the police are out of control, then you will just have an excuse to riot, you know, on the regular

Heather 6:10
well, and at some level, it's a rejection of the aphorism that the perfect is the enemy of the good, right? So the perfect is the enemy of the good, we can wish all of us should be able to recognize that in a complex system, we will not achieve perfection, that humans are fallible, humans will commit crime. And, and therefore we need a police force. And not only are humans imperfect, but police are imperfect and in any demographic, be they police or right handers or Bolivians or you know, short people or whatever it is there going to be some people who are great and some people who are not. And that will be true for police as well. But the idea that if they can't be perfect, if they cannot get the numbers of errors to zero, then we need to get rid of them entirely, is Yeah, gosh, we just keep on coming back here. And you know, I think we've been avoiding it more and more because how often Can you say the same thing, right? I'd be like,

Heather 7:01
this clearly makes no sense. It is

Bret 7:03
logic done by people who have no capacity for logic, apparently, or it's just an excuse either way, right? But it's not even the the errors have to be zero, right? Getting the errors to zero can't be done. Right, you would have to have such a draconian system in which no crime could be committed in which the police would have to show up that no one would want to live in it.

Heather 7:26
I don't think it's possible. Well, I don't care how draconian you go. You can't You can't get it to zero.

Bret 7:31
I mean, you could block everybody in solitary confinement and keep them away from every place in which crime could conceivably happen or something. But my point is, my point is there is no livable life that does not involve errors. However, this also isn't about errors, right? We leap to the stage of having riots long before anybody knows if the police made a mistake, right? And if they had that's not an invalidation of the concept of policing, it has not a justification for writing, there's some level of error you would expect. But the fact that there doesn't even need to be an error really tells the

Heather 8:05
tale. Yes, not only will no errors be tolerated at all, zero tolerance for error, but also zero tolerance for force in response to force like 00 tolerance for for state sponsored force in response to street level force and violence and looting and rioting and all of these things, right.

Bret 8:26
And obviously, people who have the capacity to think know that what you're really trying to opt to do is to minimize harm, right? So there will be some harm done by the police. There will be some harm done by criminals and what you would like is a system that overall minimizes harm which does not mean brings it to zero. That is a utopian and inconceivable outcome. But the fact is, there is no every single instance of anything newsworthy is taken as evidence of what the riders imagine that they already knew. Or as I said before, or it's simply an excuse. Yeah.

Heather 9:02
So we began when we get we got local chaos, but it's not of the protesting or riding variety. Nor is it another cat quake. Mm hmm. We began to hear Inklings just online last night there was something going on in Portland and then a good friend of our producer are now 17 Happy birthday last week. Zachary's 17 year old son happened to have been coming home from the coast last night stopped downtown and called Zach and said at the Apple Store appears to be on fire in downtown Portland. So we have a few of the videos of that that young man took the friend of our son, who I'm not going to name because we didn't ask if we could. Yeah. And, and then the three of us, Brett, Zack and I actually went downtown this morning. And to assess what we were seeing just says what It actually happened and and and you know found something's a little bit different than what you're expecting and and a lot of things that were pretty reflective of what we've been told we would say so we're going to show you some of that as well. So Zach, would you like to show some of your friends video?

Bret 10:23
See fire

Heather 10:26
again this is from last night this is from just after midnight prime would be April 17 yep in Portland

Heather 10:39
so is their sound Zack okay so if I can be heard over this just describing to people who are merely listening we've just got you know streetview shots of here's a dumpster that is smoldering closed it's probably on fire we don't we can't see that for sure.

Bret 10:59
We saw that dumpster this

Heather 11:00
morning. It was definitely I know we're going we're getting there. Okay, we're talking about last night and then there was at least one more Zach unless I missed it. Okay, I thought there was an I thought there was one showing the one actually the dumpster actually at the site at the Apple Store on fire.

Heather 11:17
Okay, so I can't wait so we're now looking at a white screen

Bret 11:25
Okay, okay. So this looks like a stepping up of the same sorts of rights that we were seeing last summer do we want to look at some other pictures? Absolutely.

Heather 11:38
I thought maybe we'd start with signs the first thing on my list suck that I sent you

Heather 11:55
photos now because they're not in the right order. Okay, why don't you just lead Zack I'm in prep.

Bret 12:02
Alright, so why don't you flip forward here All right, so traditional sentiments all cops are basketball you

Heather 12:12
know so I really don't want to show these until the end. So that one there that one and the next one for which there was a composite shot that I wanted to be the one we're showing here is all one street and so we have store closing everything must go with an entirely boarded up Street and then if you go back to the last one, you see right next door anarchie sign and a cab or capsure but all cops are bastards and several other things which are visible in the in the larger photograph, but not here. So I want to come back to my other photos but not now because I want to show them at the end of what you want to show.

Bret 12:48
Okay, so Zack Do you want to put up the other set of photos? Alright, so So here, this is exactly adjacent to the Apple Store. And you see something that has become very common here in Portland downtown. So you've had windows busted up, they are they have plywood or OSB put over them. And then these spontaneous murals go up. And the murals are of various different kinds. Some of them are accusations, some of them are designed to portray the the protesters as peace loving and creative

Heather 13:31
separation, we're going to show a bunch of these murals like that there are a lot, right, a lot of the

Bret 13:35
numbers, but many of them have high production values.

Heather 13:38
Yeah, like actually beautiful street art that, you know, if if, if there was a place to put it that wasn't about having smashed windows and so put wood up in its place. I think that there could could legitimately be a place for this sort of art in a functioning city.

Bret 13:55
Yeah, although I would say you know, you have talented people, but the fact that somebody is able to put up something colorful and load whatever payload into it, they wish and that this somehow speaks for the people of Portland is absolutely appalling. So even though some of the murals may say things that one could resonate with a lot of them really don't. And you know, either you need some sort of authority to decide what sentiments can be represented, even if you are going to have some place where street art could could be put up by by citizens. And then the problem is all right, who decides what sentiment is going to go where Yeah, so

Heather 14:33
this one, you can't see the third frame of this mural, what it says and it's also hard to read, but what it how it reads, if you're looking straight on is if my heart stops turning, will the world do the same? And this strikes me as like okay hearts, don't turn forget the basic biological innumeracy or whatever it is no worries on that front, but I feel like the the initiative behind the sentiment is a desire to have to know that if someone if their heart stops beating, the whole world will stop, right? And it reveals this level of narcissism absent any apparent desire to fix things or to make things right, it is entirely about me in the moment and destruction.

Bret 15:32
Right and this actually goes to the heart of the misunderstanding here, which is, in some sense, the puzzle is about whatever we are continuing into the future and the attack on these structures makes it very likely that this system and all those who depend on it will not meaningfully continue into the future we will be subjugated by someone else or we will be overrun by some civilization that didn't lose its mind and so watching people who conflate their own well being who basically demand that the world stop if they do is preposterous, a reasonable person understands that you are rooting for your people whoever they are, irrespective of whether you're present if you died tomorrow do you stop caring about the people that you love? No you're rooting for them and suddenly they're hobbled by the fact that they don't have your insight or help in in dealing with the the challenges of life but it doesn't change your sense about whether or not you know things matter things matter whether or not you're there and so they've lost they've lost sight of this completely

Heather 16:43
so where I was hoping to go to first though was just you know, what's the Apple Store and fire to the Apple Store burned to the ground? I know you have some pictures of that and I'd like us to show those to respond to you know, they're just social media at the moment is as usual after these things happen completely polarized and and we were just there and we actually talked to one of the workers who was working on cleaning up the so

Bret 17:11
Zach, can you show one of the pictures from the Yeah, there you go. It's a little dark unfortunately. But let's describe it so we're looking at the same mural that you were just looking at up close. There's a dumpster out in front that has clearly been burned we can show you that up close in a second. And then to the right there you see barricades, which are around the Apple Store, which was being renovated

Heather 17:36
and by the dumpster is the awning that they apparently set fire it like the dumpsters under the awning they set fire to that the awnings gone the tree is burned

Bret 17:45
and the dumpster was apparently inside the inside the Apple Store compound

Heather 17:53
as were the bathrooms that were there for the workers to fix the repairs from the previous riots right and the bathrooms got burned to the ground

Bret 18:01
so so anyway yes, the apple compound did burn the building did not burn to the ground, nor is it very conceivable that it could given what it's built out of but nonetheless it there. Apple was targeted here. And a lot of damage was done now Exactly.

Heather 18:17
Sure of the placard that apples got on the outside.

Bret 18:20
I don't have it. Ready I took it but I didn't capture it. But could you show the mural on the Apple Store. So I want to describe something here. So this mural is no longer on the Apple Store, but it is worth understanding its history in order to understand or to put in context the events of last night. So the Apple store I believe was being renovated for its own reasons and was open for one day post renovation and then it was shut down by COVID. And the aftermath of being shut down by COVID. It was attacked during riots, windows were broken and people broke in and then Apple decided to put up basically a black wall all around a plywood wall. So and then on that wall, a local artist spontaneously put up a mural focused on George Floyd and the famous lion I can't breathe and Apple decided to leave the mural in place. Many other artists then contributed to the mural and ultimately, the mural was donated by Apple to don't shoot PDFs, which is a local police watch group. Now currently on the outer fence of the apple compound, there is a sign Heather you have it you want to read

Heather 19:47
it. Yeah, I really wanted I thought we were going to show this Yes, please. So it reads Apple stands with you and the fight for racial and social justice. Black Lives Matter. The community it's not in those pictures, actually. Send it to you. The community artwork has been interested to don't shoot Portland in support of their mission for social change. Don't shoot Portland, a local black lead human rights nonprofit organization will incorporate the artwork as part of their children's art and social justice council programming. For more information visit dub dub dub dub don't shoot pdfs.org. And there's another one that I was the one who photographed it. That's even more sort of it's it's again, one of these don't hurt me walls. And so Apple Not only is putting money in the other one, they indicate they were sending, they're putting money towards these causes. And, and this is the response, right? So

Bret 20:40
I want to hone that to a slightly sharper point. Yeah. Apple, this is your fault. You did this to us, you caused this right now, it may be that it would have happened without your help. But it certainly did happen with your help. And the fact that you are pretending that people are attacking your store and you having to put up plywood and that creating an opportunity for a local artists to express it express a sentiment that I don't think represents us universally. And then you treat this as something that has to be honored is creating the problem. And basically, we have you know, runaway woke capital and well capital has, you know, the back end the business end where it does whatever it does, financially speaking, and it has the front end, where it coddles this kind of sentiment in public. And goddamnit the problem with the don't hurt me walls is that what don't hurt me really means is go hurt somebody else. So Apple, not only did you have this coming because you set us up for it. But the rest of us who did not have it come in got it too, as a result of your activity.

Heather 21:46
Yeah. And and this sort of statement by the corporations and in small businesses, but you know, the small businesses have more to lose have a higher fraction of their livelihood to lose. is creating the sense among people that this is the majority sentiment that most Portlanders are behind this, right. And in fact, we were standing there on the corner of the Apple Store downtown this morning. And there were a number of people there looking what had happened and sort of you know, some of us were talking and a guy drove by and what he said through his open window was the most the vast majority of people in Portland approve of this. And he was passed and and a lot of us are pissed legitimately. But he said this, and then he drove off his light turned green, it wasn't running away or anything. But I wanted to say to him, I don't I'm sure that's not true. I am put, put anyone, almost anyone from Portland on this corner, and look at what's happening and look at what has happened and recognize that anyone who's tried to walk around downtown in the last year, in the last 11 months, 10 months now and ask them what they approve of this and most of the guys say no, it doesn't mean that most Portlanders understand the various the various concerns and reasons that it's happening. But the fact that downtown has become a disaster area in which this could have you know it in any day that it's nice out expect that there may be at the best vandals running around and that it's increasingly difficult to find police who can do their jobs in part because they've been massively defunded in part because many of them have left because their jobs have become worse than thankless and in parts because they've had their hands tied by the the city leadership

Bret 23:42
Yes, in fact, we have many different entities playing a role that creates the exact conditions that are going to lead to this and Zach Can you show the graffiti in the stairway? Yep, you briefly pass through it

Heather 24:03
by the way we Yeah. I You did?

Bret 24:20
Okay, here it is. So this is just a piece of graffiti. This is now commonplace in Portland. What it says is kill a cop for fun, and it has a picture of a smiley face underneath. It is not uncommon to see sentiments like this the idea that police are deserving of being murdered. We also see graffiti like this about Andy know, a journalist recently, but I believe a journalist was actually assaulted last night if I understood what I saw on Twitter correctly A Portland journalist. But in any case, you have people telling you What they're actually about, right, this protest, if you were protesting something important, and somebody else in your protest was saying, kill cops for fun, then you would distance yourself so that your important point wasn't lost in an obviously crazy point. And yet that does not happen. We have the mixture of all of these things together, and they result in people being able to find what they want those who want to see these riots sympathetically can find sentiments that they resonate with, and those who want to see the whole picture of find chaos, because it's an incoherent set of statements. And frankly, anarchism is so much at the root of this anarchists who, in the aftermath of you know, after protesting and claiming that this was all driven by Donald Trump, as soon as Joe Biden one, we saw them attack the democratic headquarters and proclaim we are ungovernable and the answer is look, you are ungovernable, the rest of us are not ungovernable, we wish to be governed well. And you it's not yours to say whether any of us get good government, right? good government is essential. If you don't understand that and you're going to violate the law, then you need to pay the price. And what we have in this city, is, we have corporations and city government that are coddling these crazy beliefs. We have businesses that, you know, at, you know, are regularly trying to get vandals to move on to someone else, which of course, put someone else in the crosshairs. And then we have

Heather 26:36
but it's it's not in the purview of any small business to obliterate the vandals. You know, that's that's the government's job.

Bret 26:43
Right? It's the government's job. And the point is we important them to understand that governance is necessary. Our majority, certainly, right. We're not all insane. And the problem is, it has become hard to say that we need good governance that we need to policing it needs to be good. But yes, we need policing No, don't defund don't abolish, right these things are necessary to a functional society. And so what we are now seeing is what happens when you try to appease crazy people who don't understand the basics, and you know, we're getting unfortunately, what we collectively ordered and,

Heather 27:21
and it's I mean, it's it's going to get terrible again, like, I meant this, this was bad enough, but it's gonna get terrible again, like it was last summer, in part for the same reasons that it happened last summer and forget their cover story forget, like, Oh, it's going to be the shovin trial verdict. It's going to be this that, you know, some, you know, that's all cover story. Yeah, it's all cover story. The fact is, we have a lot of people who are dispossessed, who have who have no cannot see a way forward in the world in which they will be productive and interested and interesting. And whether or not they recognize they're conscious of that. It is a combination of an economy that is not serving people and crazy loads of student debt and credit card debt. And many people have been medicated into oblivion, so they can't even recognize what their own moods are. And they're on their damn phones all the time. And they're just stuck in a hellscape. from which they cannot escape, and no, the lockdowns continue, there are going to be a seemingly almost no live events through the northern hemisphere summer. That's two summers in a row with no outlets, no festivals, no concerts, no ability to get together and have fun and brawl and all that well. Okay, guess what we're going to do, then we're going to do the thing that the health experts has said is reflective of the actual pandemic, which is systemic racism. These people are about systemic racism, some of them originally, and I mean, you've you as as you revealed in your conversation with Britney King, and as you revealed in your conversations with Jeremy lucquin that you know, this is a whole mishmash of people. But neither you nor I have said about what is happening right now in Portland has been happening in this last week. These are protests that became riots as we sat about this what was happening all of us summer, right, because those were regular protests. And for the most part, we didn't think the protests made a ton of sense, but they were good faith. And some of them many of them were actually about you know, real heartfelt sentiment and desire for real honest good change. But reliably like clockwork every night in Portland, they became riots. And this that's happening right now this isn't doesn't even pretend. It's not even pretending to be protests. So

Bret 29:45
to be clear about it, two things came together last summer, right we have a long standing fringe anarchist movement that has been very active in the Pacific Northwest for a long time, all the way. WTO and long before

Heather 29:59
that. Yeah. So what's that like 99 or 2001? One let's do something

Bret 30:02
something in that neighborhood, but it fused with Black Lives Matter last summer in the George Floyd protest era and so you know, for a while it was sort of cloaked in this, this excuse and now you know, the two things have more or less parted ways and here what we do now is we just skip right to the riot without you know, any meaningful explanation. I do want to correct one thing though, you said that it's going to get worse. It doesn't have to, it's going to get worse because we are going to do the same thing that leads it to get worse the thing that Apple did which now Apple has been punished for for coddling the sentiment, right, that thing results in it getting worse. Yeah, see, treating these crimes lightly. Not arresting people when you do arrest thing, arrest them setting low bail, the fact of the population creating a bail fund in which people who vandalize businesses are then legally supported by the public and even Frankly, I have to say, Zach, could you put up the picture of the volunteer this morning?

Heather 31:15
I wanted to do something before that

Bret 31:22
neither is that there we go. So this is one of many volunteers who are cleaning up the streets of Portland this morning as they do reliably

Heather 31:34
we actually so I really want to finish with that before we go into talking about the schools Okay, real quickly can we just do one thing first? Zack you had in the in the pictures that you were showing that you said were from me something that's a picture that said united by love can you put that up so this was outside this is yeah these are the fancy stores in downtown Portland and this I think what's a Tiffany store maybe I'm not sure I didn't this united by love and then the next one which is right next to our

Bret 32:02
position on that photo is excellent. Thank

Heather 32:04
you. Thank you. The next one should have been Okay, so the pictures that you showed you you need to find the pictures of the women's faces that have been vandalized that were right next to that were part of the Tiffany store I don't know if they're in mine I sent it to you. So I'm going to describe them for those of you listening there is an array of photographs there we go now that's it those of them have and this is yeah it's Tiffany and it's women it's it's white women and women of color and right next to this united by love sign and all of the white women have had their faces xed out except for there's one white woman in profile who they didn't get I think they just didn't recognize her as human or something they were algorithm to nor

Bret 32:54
it may be how they understood she identifies

Heather 32:56
yeah probably so so united by love you say so this you know this elite brand right? Like I don't I don't know if I've ever even been at Tiffany's I mostly know of it from the the hamin someone Hemingway who is it the film hepper not Hemingway Audrey Hepburn in Breakfast at Tiffany's but united by love and then we see that it's it's only people with skin of a particular color. And that I don't know that reminds me of areas in which there's been no love uniting people at all and it didn't it doesn't it doesn't strike me as about inclusion or diversity or equity much

Bret 33:44
no no it's much one irony after the other

Heather 33:47
Yeah. So now I had started seeing it actually in my pictures you can show Zach as well and I guess dad has some too there were all these volunteers showing picture or all these volunteers picking up trash. Because our sky high taxes and the City of Portland apparently can't cover trash cleanup after riots. We have to we have to bring in volunteers and these volunteers were to a person you know seemed lovely and they were doing they were doing work that needed to be doing that needed to be done and why why are we using volunteers

Bret 34:30
not only Why are we using volunteers but there's something about the way Portland cannot prevent a riot. But it is right on cleaning up and trying to minimize the appearance of the riot The day after and this has been going on you know for you know since since the beginning of the George Floyd riots last year, and

Heather 34:51
we could smell solvent some places were walking where they had already cleaned up a bunch of the graffiti right as a warning,

Bret 34:56
right they they have a mechanism for cleaning the stuff And the point is what part of you doesn't understand that it is your obligation to prevent this and yes, clean up that which you cannot prevent. But, you know, doing whatever spending whatever, including the labor of people who are not being paid to clean up, you know, presumably, Portland's best citizens volunteers were willing to make downtown nicer in such a terrible circumstance, are paying the cost of Portland's worst citizens who, frankly have told us what they want to do, they want to burn it all down, they don't believe in any of this stuff. They don't believe that there are rules that can work. They've told us they don't get it, right. And so what we're going to do is we're going to leave the cost to, you know, the most benevolent among us to deal with the vandals, rather than, you know, support the police in doing good police work, and arresting people who harm Portland and its citizens. I mean, it's just so obvious.

Heather 35:55
Again, this this should not be, we should not be required to say this, but supporting the police in their ability to do good police work, can and I believe should include restricting some of what the police are currently doing, which they shouldn't be doing, and actually getting mental health professionals to be able to respond to actual mental health calls, as opposed to having police be first responders for all manner of calls, including ones for which their and other trained, nor is that the best use of their time. So unfortunately, that that proposal has often been trotted out as a replacement for police. Yeah. And that's insane. Just as frankly, it's insane to have police doing all of the work, some of which would be better done by by mental health counselors, right? Or, you know, I don't even I don't I don't know this, you know, this is not my purview. But clearly, there are at least two and probably many more sorts of work that needs to be done. And at the moment, the police force is being forced to do all of it. And of course, now it's being forced to do all of it on a shoestring budget, with hemorrhaging of the police force, because of course, good police are running away. Of course, they are.

Bret 37:01
Yeah, they're really they're in a no win situation. Yeah. And, you know, I've talked to police about the fact that people are literally calling for their heads, burning them in effigy, etc. And, you know, I must say that they appear to be unaffected by this and just treated as Oh, yes, that happens. On the other hand, you know, what a terrible thing to have this job, and to have good policing declared impossible, and all police declared guilty by a bunch of people who know nothing, right? Yeah. Yep. Just that it's, it's an appalling way to treat an essential function of society. And, and, you know, the disaster here is just, it's too predictable.

Heather 37:47
So it's not soon enough, but one thing we need is a candidate for mayor who's not even worse than Ted Wheeler. Because, you know, we collectively voted Ted Wheeler back in after a summer of demonstrably appalling governance, because the person who was closest in the polls, was literally a member of an Tifa. Member I, you know, who knows, but like, she's a supporter of antiva. Yeah,

Bret 38:13
yeah. Now, the problem, though, is I agree, we desperately need a mayor who isn't insane. And frankly, I think Ted Wheeler has behaved very, very stupidly, but I don't think he's an idiot, he could get the message and start behaving reasonably good. But one way or the other, either he wakes up to what's going on and figures out what must be done, or he doesn't, then he has to be replaced by somebody else. But you wouldn't want the job. Right?

Heather 38:42
If you have, of course, police are running away, of course, the good, you know,

Bret 38:46
right, of the people who could do the job, don't want it. And, you know, my point is, at some level, this is also on the citizens of Portland, who are bending over backwards to see reason where there is no, right, yes, and no, I wouldn't want the job of Mayor because I would worry that doing exactly the right thing would just be punished, right that doing the right thing, because it would be portrayed as authoritarian, or fascist or whatever it would would be portrayed as would result in you know, every good bit of governance going thoroughly punished.

Heather 39:23
Yeah. So following up on you know, like, like I said, the taxes are very, very high in Portland and in a functional system. That's okay. We are not usually in the position of wondering where all those tax dollars going. But right now we certainly are, yeah, especially when you've got literally volunteers doing trash cleanup after after riots. And then this is something we're going to talk about last week, but we talked about other things instead. Meanwhile, the schools in Portland which you know, schools are always a big, big piece. of our city budget are working hard on things like changing their names and their mascots. And so many of you will have heard this that Wilson High School named for the President has recently been named the Ida B. Wells High School. And you know, as it turns out to be wells is a harborwalk and interesting and valuable historic figure. I think that any of these name changes when they are coming now under threat basically are a mistake. And you know, I also never saw any argument for why Wilson was you know, horrible person except he didn't leave right now and abide by all of the well creed, right? But we see, you know, even if you do that you're not good enough, right? So they, the school changed their name back, I can't remember maybe February of this year, something like that one official January. And then they felt that they had to change the mascot as well. And they actually put out two people in the community. A number of possibilities and the possibility that one was the evergreens. Yeah. You want to go pick this up?

Bret 41:09
No, no, I just, we talked about this last week. No, okay. So all right, the evergreens as I do another podcast and my guest, I think we did talk about it last week, but but on this podcast, we didn't and so yes, the evergreens one, which caused, you know, a small shutter in our family because, you know, yeah,

Heather 41:34
I know that when I had been had I had the opportunity to vote for a mass gun and I honestly don't remember what I voted for. But I saw evergreens I was like, Oh, hell no, come on. Let's not. I don't I don't need to be constantly reminded of evergreens. Right, right. Right. But, but at one,

Bret 41:47
but it one, okay. And then a member of the now Ida B. Wells community pointed out that Ida B. Wells was a famous anti lynching activist. And, therefore, somehow, evergreen trees can't be mascots. Because I don't know something instead of logic, to dumb for fiction. to dump perfection

Heather 42:19
is what it is it is to down perfection if you wrote this into a book. A good editor would say sorry, no, not plausible. That doesn't work. The association with trees, any trees with a black woman who was an activist in an era when lynching was happening, and therefore Of course it was anti lynching? I mean like, aren't we all but also like of course she was. You know it can we also not use wooden bookcases? Like I don't where does it stop? I mean, it's just it's just to really absurd. It's, it's too absurd. And then on the same that that happened a week or so ago, the Evergreen mascot kerfuffle and of course they've they've caved they've said oh, we're going back to the drawing board we're going to consider some other mascot choices because it can't be evergreens and then yesterday we got these things in the mail. Apparently we need to license our cats. We do we can't do that. We need to license are cats and we

Bret 43:20
carry them concealed?

Heather 43:23
Especially if we're gonna carry them concealed. Yeah, so there are three options here so we can we can pay for one year or two years or three years at a time for the licensing of our cats. And for which we will receive I did go on the website and find out what we received for this and you know, it's not it's not insane it's you know, it's about animal control. And you know, if we do license our cats, maybe they'll return them to us if they get lost, although I think that would require that they were tags and if they ever met cats, cats slip their tags like, anyway, on the same day, that Portland governance once again, fails to keep African violent mob from destroying a bunch of downtown and then employs a citizen army of volunteers to help do the cleanup. They're asking us for money to license our cats.

Bret 44:12
Yes. Okay to license our cats. Right? Who are anarchists? So in some ways, it would make sense but they're libertarians. Yeah, you're probably right about that. You're right about that. But But yeah, there is there is I mean, I have to say it's very hard not to, to juxtapose these two facts especially I mean, let's let's draw the connection a little tighter. The effect of the failure to enforce the law and punish the guilty for destruction downtown, is of course, closing businesses, as you saw there are shuttered businesses across downtown and yes, some of that is COVID. But a lot of that has to do with you know, to be crazy to start a business especially in downtown Portland at the moment, right, there are roving bands of maniacs and the only way apparently not to get vandalized is to you know, proclaim things in your window that satisfy them or something. And that won't work either. Long term that's not gonna work. But anyway, the point is, by treating these claims the claims of the rioters as sacred, and therefore coddling the behavior that they engage in, as they ostensibly advanced these aims, we are killing the tax base of Portland, right, the businesses of Portland are going to flee. And that means there will be less tax money with which to do nice things for the people of Portland with which to build out Portland. So it is a more vibrant city with more jobs, that would be helpful to people. And so if you think that the result of destroying businesses in Portland is going to be good for people who are historically oppressed you, you don't understand how things work. So the idea of Yes, we are going to nickel and dime the citizens of Portland, we're going to demand more and more tax money as we behave in a way that is going to drive businesses out, which is going to lower the salaries and eliminate the careers of people who live here forced them to move to other cities. So you're going to be left with an underemployed city. And then you're going to squeeze it for taxes. that's a that's a death spiral for a city. Yeah. And yet, somehow nobody in city government can figure this out. So yes, we will license those cats when you start enforcing the law in a way that is colorblind and ideology blind and species blind and all of those things. If you're looking at it that way. I met the first three of two

Heather 46:44
of those. Yeah. And that species blind. I don't know. I don't think we want an enforcement of law that is species blind. Although that may be on the list of demands from the who's downtown at some point. Yep. Yeah. All right. Are we every time with Portland for today?

Bret 46:59
Are we done with Portland? We are not quite done with Portland. But it will come back as we discuss our next topic. I have a feeling okay.

Heather 47:08
Okay, really? Yeah.

Heather 47:11
The numbers are in talking about 390 and 13 and 2.5 billion.

Bret 47:15
i'm not i'm i'm i've girded my lines for the 2.5 billion.

Heather 47:19
Okay. I don't know where Portland shows up in here. In these numbers.

Bret 47:23
13.

Heather 47:26
Oh, okay. Yes, yes, I remember now. So, just just briefly, okay, three comes up this week. These are just numbers. From the news this week, the CEO of Pfizer, has said that it is likely that people are going to need a third shot a booster shot of the Pfizer COVID vaccine a year after getting the first two and there that there may just need to be an annual, an annual routine of shots and apparently the j&j guide or no, it was the CEO or not said something similar as well with regard to their shot. So you know, of course, this raises the question, like maybe maybe this is just gonna be like the flu shot, where the virus is evolving out from under us as we know it to be. And so boosters are required to get a closer fit to the actual virus, the people who are developing the vaccine get a closer fit to the actual virus that is maximally in circulation at the time. But, you know, it does raise the question for me and raises so many questions, but do any of the vaccine manufacturers actually have a good idea of like, what a closer fit to any of the current variants would be? Or do we have any way of knowing what variants are actually going to be maximally circulating?

Bret 48:45
So let's separate two things. Traditional booster shots are necessary not because of the change of the virus, but because of the degradation of the immunological memory. You're right. I

Heather 48:58
used booster. I use booster incorrectly, although the Pfizer CEO did as well.

Bret 49:02
Hmm. That does not Yeah, breed confidence. Yeah, I was I was

Heather 49:07
I was using his language. But you're right. Anyway, right. I

Bret 49:09
don't want to nitpick. I just want to say there are two reasons, you know, so the flu shot that you supposedly should get every year is about the fact that it's a different

Heather 49:15
it's a new vaccine. Yeah. Because it's a new flu. Right? And that seems like so that's what may be happening here with COVID. Well,

Bret 49:22
both things are likely to happen here with COVID. Okay, so on the one hand, we have the very frightening prospect that the way that these vaccines target the spike protein is going to cause these escape mutants to dominate and that we will be chasing, we're basically just signed up for an arms race, and that we are learning of the nature of that arms race that this is you know, I don't know

Heather 49:49
So why aren't both things always happening though? I mean is again, we're gonna go back to virus origins and you know, maybe this is evolving so rapidly in such a unpredictable way. Precisely. Because it did not it is not like any other virus we've seen before. But you know, why doesn't say, needing to get a rabies booster every 10 years if your tires are low, for instance, not about both, in increasing your titers, yeah, and also with new variants of rabies that has evolved in those 10 years.

Bret 50:20
In the rabies case, it's easy to think because rabies is so very rare that what you have is a virus that doesn't have a large Canvas, paint and for which there is not a lot of pressure for it to evolve. Since such a tiny percentage of the population has rabies. The point is rabies. Traditional rabies always has naive animals. So to me, in fact, it doesn't get an advantage for change. So potentially,

Heather 50:47
the more common the pathogen, the more difficult it will be to make a vaccine that is targeted and targeted for a while. And you know, maybe even I actually have no idea. But yeah, I've been tracking for decades, like hoping for the malaria vaccine, but like really, really hoping for it. And it taught me a maybe an mRNA vaccine. And I don't know, but somehow that one is super elusive in a way that other mosquito vector diseases, like yellow fever have not been.

Bret 51:20
Yep. So I think two things are true one, there is a large landscape of immunological understanding, and then there's a large landscape of what we don't know. Yeah, I will not cite Donald Rumsfeld in this case, but his wisdom is relevant here with respect to what we do and don't know it turns

Heather 51:41
out there is some far more ancient philosophical thing that he was actually riffing on when he talked about the known knowns and the known unknowns and the unknown unknowns and the unknown unknowns.

Bret 51:52
Well, the thing is, I'm a little addicted to the cringe when you when you invoke Donald Rumsfeld as a as a source of wisdom, you know, he's like the, the evil Yogi Berra or something like that. But But in any case, so we may or may not be dealing with both a booster situation here where you're remember that your immunological memory decays over time, and therefore you need a booster to remind your immune system Hey, this thing is still out there. Yeah. And we are almost certainly dealing with this case where we are putting intense pressure on the the spike protein by targeting it very narrowly with a vaccine that focuses only on that and indeed only on the original variant of the spike protein, which basically means that any way in which the spike protein can train that is electromagnetically dissimilar from the original spike protein gives it an advantage in hiding from the immune system. And so while Ah, there's your arms race

Heather 52:55
Yeah, yep, there's your arms race. Alright, so that's three let's actually skip to 90 before we go into 13 because it's more in keeping with three so 90 is the percent chance that if you self administer one of the now widely available home COVID tests in England and you get a positive result that that positive is false 90% false positive rate of the self administer tests that are now being widely used widely distributed as if I think it was April 9, and which the results of what you're being used to decide whether or not you have to quarantine and thus lose you know, work school life, everything opportunities, so boy

Bret 53:39
that's really cocked up this is British, right? I got your side

Heather 53:44
British. Yes. Okay. It's exam British to me.

Bret 53:47
I guess. I deliberately used my most American accent before it. It cocked up if I'd said that you would have spotted right away that it was a British citizen

Heather 54:01
because there's an article in The Guardian on this and I'll have you put it up in just a second sack but we discussed many episodes ago, I did not have time to go back and figure out which episode or episodes it was in the risks of false positives in testing and you know, no matter and and when the first I think it was when the first I don't remember, I don't remember what exactly the context was. But we were talking about how, as disease prevalence falls, the proportion of people who are testing to receive false positives goes up. And so you have a situation especially in the parts of England, where this is taking place where background rates are understood to be quite low with the false positives are particularly high and it's having therefore you know, in exactly the place where the disease is the least risk, you have the highest proportion of people who are suffering costs that they should not be forced to suffer especially after 13 months of this. So let's

Bret 54:56
just give people the the logic that makes it easy to deduce. Okay, indicator Where you're testing for a disease that is if you were to test for smallpox, right? 100% of positives or false, right? Because there's no smallpox anymore. So, as the disease prevalence falls, the percentage of those who get a positive, that is false. It goes up for this weird reason. So. So anyway, what does this do to us in the case where you've got a low prevalence of COVID in Britain, and a test that is now being, How frequently do you say it's being administered?

Heather 55:33
Well, let's hear I'll read you two paragraphs on this from the space. In one email. Ben Dyson, an executive director of strategy at the health department and one of health Secretary Matt Hancock's advisors, stressed the quote fairly urgent need for decisions on the point at which we stop offering asymptomatic testing. So this is basically expected that the entire population is doing this asymptomatic testing. In order to get back to normal, which we all want, quote, a ninth of April, the day everyone in England was able to order twice weekly lateral flow device tests, or Lfd. Tests Dyson route, as of today, someone who gets a positive Lfd result in say London has, at best a 25% chance would being a true positive. But if it is a self reported test, potentially as low as 10%, on an optimistic assumption about specific specificity, or as low as 2%, on a more pessimistic assumption. So that rate of false positives is from 75 to 98%. On these tests that are being that they want people to be doing all the time, and you know, of course, you've got one, your one person who is now doing this twice a week for many weeks, is is not does not even have just you know, if they get a positive, they are increasing their chances of getting any positive. And their chances of that positive being false are 75 to 98%, depending. And because they're having to take more and more tests, the chances of them getting a positive

Bret 56:58
are higher. Right now, there are a number of things that we want to know in order to figure out whether a reasonable policy could be rescued out of a test. It's this bat. Right, right. So one thing you want to know is does one false positive predict other false positives in the same person? Right, right. If it was true that any given test could throw a false positive, but then if you took a second one, it would be likely?

Heather 57:20
I think the answer to that is that it would be likely to not give a false positive. I think that is likely the case because they're talking about sounds like they're talking about doing that. But of course, then you've got double the number of tests. Well, no, you don't end up on there. You have you, you have to follow up with anyone who's got a

Bret 57:37
follow up and you traumatize people who Oh, my God, I got a positive COVID test. Do I have COVID? So anyway, there's also the question. on the good side, the reason that you might deploy a test this bad is that if the false negative rate is low, then those with COVID will be in the sample of those who test positive even though most of those people are negative. So you could if your point is we have to stop COVID from spreading. And the point is, within the small number of people who get a positive test, most of them don't have COVID. But everybody who has COVID is in that sample, too. Then you could behaviorally shift things around those Yes. And it could function but you would want to be very clear with the public. Don't freak out, when you get a positive test. Take another one, assuming that a second one is not predicted to give you another false positive. Yeah. And the you know, if the second one is negative, you don't have it, which would be true if the false negative rate was low. So you could rescue a policy out of this. But on its own, that's just a shocking number of false positives.

Heather 58:39
Yeah, it sure is. Yeah, maybe that's it. And the next number we're going to talk about is 13.

Unknown 58:49
Yes.

Heather 58:53
Should I start?

Heather 58:55
Yeah,

Heather 58:56
let me actually find I forgot to pull up. There is of course discussion. my computer's not working now. Now have court packing. Right of the Biden. ministration. Here we go.

Heather 59:24
No, okay. Nevermind. Yeah, this is not the one. Maybe it is the one. Okay. Yeah, I guess you can show this. So Robbie George, who was a friend of ours, extraordinary. Man Who is the was a professor at Princeton of law. tweets this week. As long as people understand that court packing is a performance not a proposal we'll all be fine. Parentheses performance masquerading performances masquerading as proposals or anything but unusual in American politics and indeed in Politics Generally, the important thing is to see them for what they are. So I saw this yesterday, actually, he'd done one earlier, which is what I was trying to pull up, but I, but I'm not finding it. And I breathe a sigh of relief. And I'm like, oh, boy, you know if anyone knows. It's it's, it's Professor George. And I sure hope he's right. And I made contact with him to see, to see on what basis he was making that claim. And we got on the phone with him yesterday and spoke with him for a while, and I don't you're neither of us. Robbie, George is a constitutional scholar. And we are not. But in in very brief, and you will, you will correct me as I make errors, and then we apologize for any errors that remain. The Constitution only mentioned Supreme Court, Congress needs to create all the other courts. So the only court mentioned by the Constitution Supreme Court,

Bret 1:00:56
other courts are implied their existence is implied, it says and other courts as may be necessary, or something,

Heather 1:01:03
I think that's right, yep. The Supreme Court has explicit jurisdiction in conflicts between states and between foreign ministers, but does not have relevant jurisdiction in all things in the States. And the original number of supreme court justices was not specified by the Constitution, Congress had to decide that. And they could have chosen anything. They could have chosen one, the chosen 800, they could have chosen anything, they chose five. There was no building for the supreme court at first they were they were itinerant, they rode a circuit around the country doing what they did

Bret 1:01:35
when in Washington, they met in the Congress, but often they rode circuit, which meant they went out to the other judicial circuits and made rulings apparently, and pubs and saloons. And

Heather 1:01:48
yeah. And and I think, in part because this work was, you know, was on horseback going out into the countryside, the basically five pretty quickly didn't seem like it was enough. And so due to issues of what was invoked was issues of workload that number one up to nine and actually flux fluctuate, I think, like 910, nine, eight, around there, and then kind of stuck at nine. pretty early. I can't remember when. Yeah, some sometime in the 1800s. But I'm not sure exactly one. I don't think we need to do it. Should you want to talk about all this stuff about judicial review, and Dred Scott? No,

Heather 1:02:34
I don't I don't think we we need to. So

Heather 1:02:38
basically, then, fast forward to FDR. Okay. So FDR, and his new deal era laws were being repeatedly struck down. So we had nine supreme court justices at this point, and his new deal, his new deal era laws were being repeatedly struck down by the Supreme Court. And this pleased him not at all. Unlike today, when it's pretty transparent. And a government will say, actually, we just don't like the tenor of the court. And so we're going to add more justices. The explanation for why FDR felt that there were more justices needed, was at work is very demanding. And the justices are very old. And so we're going to make new spots in the court for everyone over 70 and a half years old, 70 and six months, who's on the court, and that turns out to have been 96 of them. So with a you know, just like that FDR was suddenly going to get 15 justices where before they were not he was going to get to a point six of them. And boy, was that going to change the tenor of the corks there were I think, if I were there, like four dedicated conservatives and three dedicated liberals, and there were two who, who would go either way. And in fact, it was justice Owen Roberts, who was one of those two, who started to switch his votes. And again, we're not going to get into some of the details here, such that FDR did not end up going through with his plan to to basically pack the court, but the fact is that court packing, the court packing proposal by FDR was in many legal scholars views maybe the second biggest black guy for him that he did, he did a tremendous amount of, of good, I would argue for sure. And then there were a couple things that he did that were really quite egregious. And the top item on that list was the decision for the internment of the Japanese, the Japanese Americans. On You know, on which side there are a number of people you wouldn't have expected to be. And then, you know, by, by Professor George's estimations, and apparently other legal scholars as well, this, this attempt to pack the court was really the second most egregious thing that FDR did, because it would be the end of judicial independence. If any president can do that. Then you do not have an independent judiciary. And that's just that's the end. Yeah, that's that's the end of our system of governance the

Bret 1:05:07
end because it will create a, a arms race in which each new administration add members to the court to change its decision making effectively, it makes it a subordinate of the executive branch. And so that's the danger we're in here is is why this is part of why some of us are so alarmed to hear this proposal. You know, it's not that this wasn't floated at the end of the Trump administration, as you know, something that as a proposal during the election, right, by Biden, but to hear it actually offered as a policy shift is jarring. And I must say I also had the reaction. I was very troubled in hearing that they would seek new seats on the Supreme Court. And I was very relieved to hear relieved and surprised to hear Robbie George say that he thought this was never going to happen.

Heather 1:05:58
Yeah, his I mean, his position was basically everyone in Congress knows this history that I just told you. Yeah. And there will be a lot of performative stuff going on. And people will trade votes behind the scenes in order to be able to say that they did or they did not vote for this thing. But you know, he's, he's, he's a conservative. So I think he said something like, even the democrats know, that this would be the end of judicial independence, and therefore cannot Well,

Bret 1:06:33
the democrats know, and a few Democrats in Congress are too smart to let it happen. That doesn't mean that there aren't democrats who would do this. There certainly are. But the point is, you need all the democrats to support this proposal. And there are enough democrats who understand the hazard of this and do not, you know, both would prevent it, because it's the right thing to do, and also don't want responsibility for destroying the independence of the judiciary. And so they won't and so presser, George's point was, the vote might end up being close, because to the extent that people know it's going to fail, they can get in and signal for free, but that it will, it will fail. And he said he could be wrong, but that he doesn't. But this looks like a proposal that is being offered for virtue signaling value and not as a serious proposal. And that you can tell because, in part, the committee that has been established to look into this is both too large to function. He said we as academics would recognize this passage

Heather 1:07:36
has 36 people on it. I remember being co chair of a committee to find new premises, which the president of the college, not George bridges, put 17 people on as like you just don't want us to succeed. What is wrong with you? Right? This one has 36 people. And so

Bret 1:07:52
so Dr. George said, Look, it's too big, they bait they made a committee that can't work. And what's more, they put conservatives on it. And not only did they put conservatives, but they didn't put branded conservatives, they put smart conservatives. So anyway, they've set it up to fail, which Okay, if that's true, it's still it's a despicable proposal. But we can breathe a sigh of relief that it's not actually going to happen.

Heather 1:08:15
Yeah. And so let's see, you know, so we're gonna get charactered as right wingers who want a conservative court, and, and, you know, we're citing a conservative law professor, in order to support our contention that this would be a bad idea. How do you deal with a caricature? Well just not

Bret 1:08:37
know, well, I'm gonna I'm in a tough spot here, I have a feeling you are too, but that's why I bring it up. And I will speak for myself. I am concerned about the number of important properties which govern us, some of which are official governance properties, like the executive branch and the Congress. But others unofficially governance, you know, Silicon Valley, for example. I'm concerned about the degree to which runaway left wing thought owns these important structures, and that it is the failure of anything to credibly oppose these wrong beliefs that is putting us in such danger. So whereas I would not under ordinary circumstances, prefer a conservative court. I think I would not prefer a conservative court although there's an argument that even if you're a radical like me that you want a restraining force and it might be that the court is the place for conservatism but at the moment, with this runaway uninvestigated team, blue left leaning stuff, you need some force that can say no, and really the only one left is the supreme court. So at this point, I, you know, there's nothing wrong with talking To a conservative, Robbie George has a great die. And he has a very deep understanding of the issues in play. And he diff differs with us somewhat on values, but it's not like I, you know, don't respect his perspective or feel any shame at all. And talking to him, he is he is the person I would go to first, to understand anything in this in this realm. But it is also the case that the court packing proposal is dangerous. The idea that it is a remedy is preposterous, right? It is nakedly political. And at this moment, if we hit you know, if there was ever an argument for a conservative court, this is the moment that we need such a thing. And, you know, I say that with full understanding that there are certain questions that the court may rule on in which, you know, we might get decisions that are very troubling to those of us who are those of us on the left, but nonetheless, that may be the price we have to pay to have any branch of government that is capable of restraining the the the out of control forces that have taken control of, of all things governance.

Heather 1:11:17
Yeah, we have, we have lost in too many places a loyal opposition. Right. And this is this harkens back also to what I was invoking about what's happened in Portland, that in the last election, which was also a mayoral election here in Portland, we actually had to vote for the guy who helped create helped facilitate at that point, what would it have been five months of protests, that reliably became riots and made our beautiful downtown disaster zone, we had to vote for him, because the other person, the person running against him was farther to the left. Farther and not here. Not this isn't the left I recognized farther to the anarchist farther to the destroy everything, burn it all down, all cops are bastards. And, you know, when it's hard to imagine, it's really it's impossible really to imagine a Republican candidate for mayor in Portland getting anywhere, but we need, we need to size this to the degree that there are two legitimate sides. And of course, there's, you know, you can frame the sides and across all sorts of axes. But we need for any given set of issues there to be a vibrant and lively set of people on the other side who are allowed to speak, and who wield some power so that they can push back. And we don't have that in Portland. And we largely don't have that in the Democratic Party. And we don't have that among corporate CEOs. Largely, we don't have that in Silicon Valley, we don't have that in Hollywood, we don't have that in the media, we don't have that in academia. And so and, and this is not the left that you and I grew up with, this is not a left that that we stand by and are proud of. And so you know, it's therefore even more clear to us how, how much we need, you know, opposing forces, whether or not you agree with those opposing forces, because their existence itself is what's necessary.

Bret 1:13:11
So I have a little rubric around this, which of course you do. So there's, you know, there's a reason that I've shown on the podcast before my political compass test, which has me really far over to the left and really far over to the libertarian, so lower left hand,

Heather 1:13:30
anti authoritarian, or not right, and very far left.

Bret 1:13:35
There's a reason I land there, right. And it's because of values and beliefs that I actually do hold. But it does not mean that I think the left is correct, and it would be better off if the right simply disappeared. I know this not to be the case, right? The point is, you have a dynamic tension between the instinct towards progress to make things better, which if left, unopposed, always treads into territory where it creates unintended consequences. And it does harm and the impulse to preserve what functions which if unopposed, becomes stifling, right becomes stingy and stifling. And it doesn't accomplish lots of things that could be accomplished. So what you want is a force pushing in the direction of making things better, and a force holding its feet to the fire and making sure it doesn't propose dumb things that get out of control, right? It's the tension between those two things that makes the system work. And my sense is anybody on either side who thinks we'd be better off if the other side disappeared, has already told us they don't understand anything about governance and they can be safely ignored. So that's

Heather 1:14:44
it right there. That that deserves to be shouted from the rooftops. Anyone on either side who thinks would be better off at the other side disappeared, has told us already that they know nothing about how things work and don't deserve to be listened to.

Bret 1:14:57
It's really important and you can always do detect this anytime any party, whether it's the fucking Nazis or the democrats who starts thinking or dreaming about one party rule and what it's going to do now that it's finally decisively defeated the opposition, right? That is a dangerous force. And it has to be opposed. So no shame whatsoever in talking to honorable conservatives. And the interesting thing is, you will find

Heather 1:15:23
Oh, I universally I don't get anyone who says that you're a problem for talking to people? I'm not I don't I'm not interested in responding to that, that that was not the caricature that I was talking about. It was the caricature of your concern about the expansion of the Supreme Court, then you must love all of the all of the people who've recently been put on it. And well, we're actually haven't even spoken to that at all.

Bret 1:15:45
Yeah, yeah. Yeah. So in any case, people on both sides who get it recognize the importance of the tension. And I would just say the final Capstone on this is, this is me speaking in riddles, I guess. But I'm a liberal, who wants to live in a society so good that I get to be a conservative. And the point of the point about this is, if you're actually fighting for a kind of progress that's achievable than having attained that progress. You don't want to keep going in the direction of progress for its own sake. So

Heather 1:16:20
now I just think many people on the left think they're environmentalists. And another word for environmentalist is a conservationist and conservationists and conservatives share that root of wanting to conserve something that exists. Yeah. And if you if you actually don't think you can ever attain what you're trying to do, then you need to stop breaking stuff in our presence and and let us create good things. And if you really think that the good things that exist are not worth conserving, then what universe are we in? It doesn't make any sense. It's incoherent.

Bret 1:17:00
Yeah, we're in a universe of children throwing a tantrum, because they're not happy. And they don't know why. And, you know, again, I think we have to be fair, at some level, part of the reason that we have so many people eager to burn it all down, people who do not understand what would happen if we burned it all down, is because society has failed to provide meaningful opportunities for large numbers of people. It's drugged them when, you know, the real problem was that we under invested in, you know, schooling and other such things,

Heather 1:17:33
and failed to understand what children are and what development is, right.

Bret 1:17:36
And we've allowed markets to deliver toxic toys to all of us that have deranged people who could otherwise have, you know, learned to think clearly. So anyway, it's not like there isn't some problem that these kids throwing a tantrum in the street and burning down businesses with no understanding of what world they're inviting, you know, something created that force, and it didn't start with these people. But you do have to discipline people who have decided to, to destroy that which they could not have built.

Heather 1:18:11
Yeah, that's right.

Heather 1:18:14
All right. We're done with 30. Oh, did you want to show a picture of it?

Bret 1:18:17
Yeah. As long as nine? Yeah. Let's go. Well, it was 13. But it's gonna be nine. So Zach, will you show the Ninth Circuit?

Heather 1:18:32
So in our walk around downtown Portland this morning, the three of us? Were at second me. We ran across the Ninth Circuit Court here in Portland.

Bret 1:18:40
Yeah, man. It's actually one yeah, block from the Apple Store on Pioneer Square. Here you go. So yeah, this is not my favorite picture from the lot. But nonetheless, here we have the door to the Ninth Circuit. And it is of course, boarded up because in Portland, you wouldn't want to have glass on the ground floor. Because you know, that could invite writing. beautiful city. Yeah. So anyway, the irony of this, of course, is that those who are focused on oppression, should be standing around the Ninth Circuit, shoulder to shoulder protecting it against violence, because courts are absolutely the best tool we've got. And it's not to say that courts haven't made serious errors. Right. You know, in talking to Robbie George yesterday, you know, we talked about Dred Scott, for example, courts make errors, but on balance, you know, it's like seat belts, right? Do seat belts kill a few people they do people you know, go into the water and they can't escape their car. But in general, when you click the seatbelt, you just made yourself way safer, because the net effect of seatbelts is so positive. Well, the net effect of courts on the you know, rights and opportunities of the oppressed is wildly positive. And yet here you have, you know, hoodlums attacking the Ninth Circuit and the Apple Store and basically anything that standing they wish to reduce to rubble. And it tells you they don't understand anything about what's good for the people they claim to be advocating for.

Heather 1:20:16
Yeah. All right. 2.5 billion, is our next number is our final number. Before we talk a little bit about lizards and a little bit about coyotes. Don't take a guess or you're just you're you're synthetically terrified at the moment.

Heather 1:20:34
By 2.5 billion.

Bret 1:20:36
2.5 billion is the number of people on earth who understand that helium and hydrogen have mass even though they will rise rather than fall towards the Earth.

Heather 1:20:53
You think 2.5? How many people do we have a seven and a half billion?

Bret 1:20:57
Yeah, seven nafti.

Heather 1:20:58
Do you think a third of the earth's population knows that helium and hydrogen have mouse?

Heather 1:21:05
I think that's high. I think you're

Bret 1:21:08
well, I'm not but no, you're right. Sorry. It's probably high. Okay.

Heather 1:21:15
No, in fact, the number 2.5 billion

Bret 1:21:20
is the is the number of people who know that insects are animals.

Heather 1:21:25
Oh, yeah. I wish that number was higher. I hope it's that high.

Heather 1:21:32
Sure, yeah. That's still seems high. Probably Really? Yeah. I'm afraid so. No,

Bret 1:21:36
I think it seems just about right. Okay. So, because, really, it's just got to be the number of the educated, and the uneducated, both of which will grasp that these have to be animals, and it's the sort of educators who won't miss it, right?

Heather 1:21:56
I don't I don't know. I I don't know.

Heather 1:22:01
So this week, they should have a bunch of places and I think frankly, a lot of them corrected it. And the only headline that I recovered was from CNN which proclaimed how many T rex were there billions it turns out and they're all these headlines this week. They're like 2.5 billion dinosaurs Rex is once roamed the earth. And and I looked at that first one, like,

Heather 1:22:27
what what are you talking about? And um, you know,

Bret 1:22:32
now if it has been if it had been Stegosaurus

Heather 1:22:38
you wouldn't have had this reaction, right? Of course, I would have you would have stiga sources. Yeah. Yes.

Bret 1:22:46
I hope I'm right about what a Stegosaurus is. Think of sources a bigger before. Yeah, yeah. Okay.

Heather 1:22:51
But 2.5 billion is a lot of animals. So I mean, precisely because it's sort of 2.5 billion is this number that's close enough to the number of humans on Earth. It's a number that although it's actually pretty hard to grasp for just about everyone because it's kind of close you know, it's it's about a third of the number of humans on Earth right now. It's a number that most people can sort of get a sense of like third is a T rex is on earth is there are people that seems improbable. So the actual research apps here we go exactly just show this briefly. Absolute abundance and preservation rate of Tyrannosaurus Rex published by Marshall at all and this week science estimating dinosaur abundance here we have from the abstract, we estimate that its abundance at any one time was about 20,000 individuals. That makes sense, yes. That it persisted for about 127,000 generations multiply which is a lot and it's a lot it's actually it's about 2.5 million years, and that the total number of T rex that ever lived was there for about 2.5 billion individuals and then they go into what the fossil recovery rate is estimated to be in such Okay, that makes some sense twin so and you're pretty much restricted North America 20,000 T. rex is at a time in North America is pretty big. Actually. That's that's a sizable population. But I can understand that like that's plausible, right? How many? How many bears? Do you think there are North America right now? I actually have no idea I just thought of that question. I don't know but like, probably far fewer than 20,000 at this point. But you know, we're how many

Heather 1:24:34
there's at the North America. Yeah, he

Heather 1:24:37
said this morning, though.

Bret 1:24:37
A lot more than that. Really? Yeah. Oh, boy. Am I gonna get myself in trouble. But yeah, it'd be a lot more a lot more than that. I mean, if we're including, you know, far reaches of Alaska and Canada,

Heather 1:24:49
I still include Canada, North America. I'm willing to do

Bret 1:24:53
that. I mean, I'm a liberal in many regards, but I'm conservative with respect to regarding Canada as geograph conservative as part of as part of North America and I'm very progressive in regarding

Heather 1:25:05
to Canada. Yes, yeah.

Bret 1:25:10
You just stepped on the joke where I pissed off the entire tiny population of Canada by claiming that it was really the 51st state but Oh, I'm

Heather 1:25:17
sorry. I do, I do want you to piss off the entire population of Canada. They're nice about it even when. So nice, unduly nice. Um, so anyway, this, you know, there wasn't an actual innumeracy going on here. But these headlines, and again, unfortunately, I think that so many people were like, what do you guys do? What are you talking about that they corrected them? Because they know what actually, I think reported wrongly about the actual research, which is cool. And it's lots of estimates. No, maybe the estimates are wrong. And they actually I think, say I don't remember now in the paper, like maybe off by an it might be an order or two magnitude in either direction, maybe it was just an order of magnitude in either direction. Which would mean you know, 250 million to 25 billion. Directors, but the screaming headlines clearly made it seem like some scientists just declared that a third as many humans as currently are on earth once roamed the earth the same time t Rexes and that's insane.

Bret 1:26:19
It's insane, but I do want to point out less insane if these had been

Heather 1:26:25
herbivores, not gigantic herbivores. Well,

Bret 1:26:28
I should look up how big a Stegosaurus gigantic gigantic okay. I was looking for. I was looking at what did they rename the circuit? Yeah, not not a dinosaur Giga. I like birds. But

Heather 1:26:45
we must have been going for a while now. Right.

Bret 1:26:47
But But in any case, you know, how many cows are there in North America? Well, they've had our help. Right. But my point is, there's also a landscape out there. You know, there were a lot of bison, I don't

Heather 1:26:58
think there were 2.5 billion by snow.

Bret 1:27:00
There weren't Bo there aren't, you know, they're 300 million Americans. So you know, that's just correct for Freescale that my point is a large number is plausible. If you're talking about a moderate or small sized herbivore, the idea that your top carnivore could possibly attain such a number is insane.

Heather 1:27:18
Yes. So that that is also true, but this number is so out of scale. Yes. I didn't I didn't even get there. I didn't even get to be like, but it's a top carnivores. Like that number simply makes no sense.

Bret 1:27:27
Right? No, and you reported the number to me with a straight face to see if I would, you know, if I was paying attention. You know, it was like a half a second of like, what, what, what number did you just say? But that was partially predicated on the fact that, you know, not only a carnivore, but a huge one. Yeah, right. The biggest and so little tiny arms. But it But anyway, yeah, it's it's amazing. But it you know, it harkens back to what we described was that last week, when we talked about the absurd RT headline about how the Amazon was actually contributing to global warming, by dying,

Heather 1:28:11
you know, essentially a longer time ago than that, but yes, I'm

Bret 1:28:14
talking. But anyway, it's that sort of thing, where it's like, you know, somebody in the newsroom just has the most tenuous grasp on science. And, you know, puts two and two together and get something in the neighborhood of seven. And, you know, and then only the math

Heather 1:28:31
geeks will care about this. Right? But we don't like those people anyway.

Bret 1:28:35
What What would it take to just get basic quality control on scientific claims in mainstream publication? just basic quality control?

Heather 1:28:44
Well, apparently more than we're willing to give?

Bret 1:28:47
Could we start a service? Like run it by a scientist? Oh, no, that's not good enough. Run it by a scientist who doesn't suck. Right? We could just collect some scientists who don't suck. You could buy our time by the hour to just check over stories.

Heather 1:29:01
Like you are going to get requests. Oh, no. Yes. Yeah. So you got to get yourself a project manager, because I'm not project managing this one.

Heather 1:29:10
Run it by a scientist. Someone want to create that app, run it by a scientist who doesn't suck, run it by sat on it? What would be the acronym on that? So you want an app? Or an ad by a scientist? Who doesn't suck? Yeah, it doesn't, it doesn't look very good.

Bret 1:29:29
Alright, it means the Smith it needs

Heather 1:29:31
work. Yeah, yeah. So you and all the people who approached you about this can work.

Bret 1:29:37
What I need is an app, run it by a marketing person who doesn't suck and they could come up with something better.

Heather 1:29:41
It's really not just the name, that's going to be the problem. Well, okay, so I feel like we had a picture and I don't know where the picture is now, last week in our q&a. So usually, we don't bring stuff from our q&a into the main part of the podcast because people who are Just listening don't have access to that. You always do on YouTube Of course, we were asked about a lizard that someone found while gardening outside of Seattle. I have in my notes here is the animal in question. Well, I don't have the picture. So all I have is I have a book. I can't show the book though, because it's going to reveal that this lizard is not a lizard at all. This lizard is ambystoma. Macro. dactylon, long toed salamander. Terrible macro dactylon, meaning long Toad ambystoma. It's the type genus of the family and Mr. matadi. And it's a salamander. It's not a lizard. What's the difference? So how some are tech is just freaking out today, isn't it? I thought I actually, that keeps happening. I could have shown any number of trees for this. But here is a tree actually, that I created for inclusion in our book. So the street some version of is going to be in our book in the chapter in which we just go through the deep history of the lineage that humans have belonged to. And so we have more or less reading left to right on this tree of tetrapods time, more or less, and then the the vertical direction, what would be a vertical axis if this were an XY coordinate system is meaningless. And so you have here if you trace, for instance, here, from the root of the tree, up to hear at the top, Captain Smith, the topic could be anywhere. We have amphibians, salamanders, a type of amphibian. And it's a totally different line up here to get to the lizards. And lizards is not referring to lizards, other lizards like amphibians, but other snakes and other lizards. And so this, this is not the place to give a systematics lecture, but point is amphibians, of which salamanders are a portion are sort of the basil tetrapod group, they don't have an ability to be totally free from the water because they have an egg that desiccate. It's when they get away from water. And we had this amazing innovation called the amniotic egg. And all the reptiles and their descendants, which includes birds and includes mammals, a separate lineage of reptile descendants are amniotes. And we can be completely free of the water and lizards are one of those, one of those groups, but many salamanders look like lizards and vice versa. And there are certainly diagnostic ways that you can tell the difference. But at some level, this used to be an answer. The very first field season that we spent in graduate school, we were in Costa Rica with john VanderMeer, who was our professor and we had four or five other grad students with us. And he basically created a summer long, tropical biology and, and kind of land use course. And you know, he'd be walking around showing us like, and that's wealthier. And that's socrata. And you see, Pete loved the palms, like, Oh my god, there's so many problems, how do we tell the difference? And he started to say things like, the difference between that's Gestalt Gestalt became the answer that he would give to us as to how to tell the difference between organisms sometimes be like, Oh, man, you know, that's not helpful. Because we don't have the Gestalt yet. We don't have the sense yet of what it is that you're honing in on. And he's an excellent scientist, he knew that there are actually characters that describe the history that reveal that is revealed to be different between these two different clades. And he wasn't fully conscious of what he was discerning, but there are differences between them.

Bret 1:33:37
Well, I think he was always conscious of the actual characteristics, but in general, you don't need them. And so they were tired, he was just, you know, I like john quite a bit. And I appreciate his frustration over certain things. And so at some level, what he was saying was figured out, that's one of these, that's one of those, they're different. Now you figure out what the difference is, so you can reliably recognize them and you know, it is something you just have to do and so it is, you know, default is basically like, you know, once you get the trick, you'll you'll be able to spot the difference, even if you can't, or don't want to specify it but

Heather 1:34:20
yeah, so one of the one of the easy differences between that you can you can tell a salamander apart from a lizard is elicited some scales and some of them are very smooth. If you're looking at a skink, those scales are going to be very smooth. They're not going to be keeled. They're not gonna have little ridges down them like for instance, rattlesnakes do. But they are scales. If you if you look at them close, you find that their scales and salamanders have no scales and their skin tends to be a little tackier. And often wet as well.

Bret 1:34:47
I actually think it's very tasteful.

Heather 1:34:49
Yeah, from all of your sound when you're looking.

Bret 1:34:52
Speaking of sound mentally I did want to point out that although salamanders and lizards are distinct and recognizably, so that we have run into in our history one place where the two were conflated and it got recorded in an official name.

Heather 1:35:09
You remember? I said amfa glasses? No. Glasses no

Bret 1:35:13
no not not a Latin name. Oh place name

Heather 1:35:17
playstyle You mean like a common name or a lizard like remember lizard like bc on on Vancouver Island?

Heather 1:35:23
Yeah, yeah, so

Bret 1:35:24
lizard lake is a lake with an impressive population of tariqa granulosa I think which is the rough skin newt. Pound for pound probably the most toxic animal on earth.

Heather 1:35:36
All newts are salamanders not all salamanders are newts correct?

Bret 1:35:40
I know you know that that yeah. So anyway, this lake it is an actual lake has a

Heather 1:35:48
lake is a misnomer. huge population

Bret 1:35:50
of these I don't know if this population is always a quite excited so Theresa tends to go on land sometimes. And then it breeds in

Heather 1:35:58
the water migrate on land. They do their like breeding migrations on land, but some

Bret 1:36:01
populations I think some populations only the males are permanently aquatic anyway there's some flexibility around it but in this lake, you can stand on the side and look in and in certain places you can see 1020 individuals swimming around there. They're very cool because they're toxic. They're completely unafraid and so you can interact with these notes easily catch them who don't like them you know looking at was not eating them is definitely not a good idea.

Heather 1:36:30
But anyway, the same toxin is puffer fish out

Bret 1:36:34
Yes. Same Nitro toxin. Exactly. So anyway, they The lake is called lizard like for no good reason. That's Yeah, well there you have it. All right.

Heather 1:36:47
I would gladly just go on and on about lizards, but I'm not going to we want to say a little bit about coyotes following up on last week. So do you have video to show?

Bret 1:37:00
Do you have some video to show and maybe Yeah, you want so you want to set it up?

Heather 1:37:08
Sure. Sure. You last week but we're talking about the game cameras that you've set up all around our property and our problem with these three coyotes is that we've been seeing and how our cats are going crazy because we've kept them locked inside because these coyotes are hunting our cats and everyone else's cats as well. And one of them you saw on the Game Cameras we saw on the game cameras that you set up has as one eye one eye their pupils blown out you know we don't we haven't seen it

Bret 1:37:32
clean now no more than we did yet we showed last time and animal and only one of its eyes reflected which is very unusual and you can see this both on the camera with the infrared and I also saw it in my headlamp when I look out and I look for eyes only when I reflected back which is unique in my experience actually yep

Heather 1:37:50
and and almost certainly enough to diagnose like that's that individual like the chances that you know another coyote in our area is missing their right eyes is very unusual. And you know again, I don't know if it's a hole in the head or or we didn't at that point. No, no, no. Yeah, right. So what was it would have been like mn maybe the very day after the podcast last week, Sunday or maybe Monday. The weather was turning gorgeous here and I was out with Maddie our Labrador out we live on the edge of this ravine. That's the sort of green space that goes down into creeks that flows into a giant giant Park about a mile away. Which is part of why we have this coyote problem. And I'm walking down down down and Maddie starts to freak out and she gets right up close to a tree and I'm trying to get her to shut up because I don't I don't know why she's barking and and I come around this tree and recover on a very steep slope and she's up against this big hole in the base of the tree and out of this tree is poking a snout in Nepal. So she has found a den and add this snout and the PA are are grabbing out at her you know open mouth like oh, oh crap. Our dog just found the coyote den. So I managed to get her away and pull her up slope and get her inside and get you and we go right back down. And just as we get back down there we see her as it turns out the one eyed coyote leap out of this thing and and go away. And then I won't say one more thing and I'll let you pick up the story. I looked in the den and found two cats. So there's two two babies in there. Just downhill of our house that that mama coyote wanted to turn our cats into more coyote

Bret 1:39:45
So anyway, we quick as we could set up some cameras on the den and we caught a very interesting behavior. So as I was setting up the cameras Heather Heather was standing just upslope with me. The coyote mother the one eyed coyote was essentially circling us and it would go across the ravine and how all it would go up above us and stand in a log and how old

Heather 1:40:12
is middle of the day she's

Heather 1:40:12
howling middle of day

Heather 1:40:14
she gets someone from a nearby house to start yelling Shut up. Yeah, like I'm not going to work with a coyote

Bret 1:40:19
right? But anyway, so she was very disturbed by us and I was pretty sure I knew what was gonna happen which was she was gonna have to move the kits which So anyway, I set up cameras and why don't we show what we caught here See if you can see her entering on the far right she's got a path that she has worn and the den is smack dab in the center of that Ivy covered trees the ivy is an invasive we've been removing I haven't robbed it from this Dennis I don't want to disturb it but

Bret 1:41:03
nothing since show the edited one so we set up this Yeah, we set up the GoPro

Heather 1:41:15
can have her howling on the swing. Do you edit it down? Okay,

Bret 1:41:20
did they hear it just now? Okay, she's you can see her approaching.

Heather 1:41:25
So for those just listening, we've got her coming up the path down and now

Bret 1:41:32
it's a very steep path. Only big enough for a coyote. I tried to navigate it. Okay, now you see her she's looking around, she's very concerned. And still concerned standing at the front of the den, presumably.

Heather 1:41:54
She goes.

Bret 1:41:58
Now what you just heard was her picking up one of her kits, it starts to scream, and she gently takes it in her mouth and leaps out and runs away out of frame. Now we only we only caught the one. In video on the GoPro we have just a fragment of the removal of the other kit on one of the game cameras. Yeah, I don't have it here. Oh, game camera triggered late. You have another video? I don't know what that would be. Jeez. Yeah, yes. Yes, the same is gonna be the same thing. So anyway, but we have

Heather 1:42:38
now days after we have photographic and video evidence of her removing both of the kits. And then a visits by her and by at least one other individual late that night and on several successive nights as well to the den. And in

Bret 1:42:56
fact, in one he goes in. So we don't know what the relationship is between these animals. Now, this animal with the one eye has been traveling around with two other animals who look very similar to me. And I wondered, before we knew about the den. whether this was her, you know, previous brood, whether those were two animals that she was traveling with, because there are a lot of coyotes around here and we hear them howling at night, you know, there might be 10 animals that we hear. But these three travel together, they get along very, very well. And it seems like they're probably familial relations. And it is unclear from the game camera. Whether or not the visit during the night at the den that is now abandoned is one of those two animals or whether it's another animal and whether or not I don't know, I think it is unlikely, but it is possible that those kits are actually the one eyed mother. We By the way, you can tell that this is the same animal because she also has a conspicuous black patch on her back. So anyway, it makes it quite clear that it's one one animal, but it could be her mate, which I think is unlikely based on the way coyotes usually bond. Or it could be one of the previous brood if that's indeed who she is hunting with on a nightly basis, but it's all very interesting.

Heather 1:44:20
Yeah, it is. And just to pick up on something else that came up I think in the q&a last time, it was recommended that we get wolf urine and distributed around to to deal with the coyote is and we ordered some write up, but it just came late last night and so we have not yet had time. So we do not yet know if or how that will work.

Bret 1:44:45
Yes, and you know if the coyotes so we are still getting evidence of coyotes each night Even though the den is now abandoned, but the coyote problem clears up and we're left with all this wolf here and we'll have to find other things to do with it. I don't know If it's good as a drink mixer apparently we have not smell that we haven't opened it yet, but apparently is quite putrid. Yeah, I'm not I'm not looking forward to using this because who knows how it will disturb the ecology, you know, it's going to drive our own animals nuts, the evidence of wolves. But it is also going to change the ecology of the place, which we're hesitant to do because we're so interested in what's going on out there.

Heather 1:45:31
Well, it is less likely to perturb the birds much. Yes, they are not primarily navigating via smell. I think unless you have a particular thumbnail that you've already decided on that you want to show here. We have reached the end reaches rather scattershot,

Heather 1:45:50
chaotic, chaotic but no trombones at all Yeah,

Bret 1:45:55
not a one but not a single we'll use one of the one of the shots from downtown as the as the thumbnail Alright,

Heather 1:46:02
so um, announcements please subscribe. Like if you're listening on the audio write a review. I think I think if you write a comment on YouTube that also affects the algorithm. We for those of you just listening we'll be back next week. Same time same place for those of you watching if you feel like it join us in 15 minutes for a live q&a answering questions you have posed during this hour in Super Chat and next hour once again right now the 48 hour period for answering asking questions for our private two hour q&a that we do monthly at my Patreon is open so you can go there to Heather highest Patreon but also has Patreon conversations every month at at his questions can go to Dark Horse dot moderator gmail.com and let's see we've got we haven't updated in a while we've got some cool stuff available at store dot Dark Horse podcast.org. And the clips channel is continuing to put out clips at a remarkable rate. And if there's anything that you particularly want clipped, please consider emailing again that dark horse

Bret 1:47:18
dot moderator@gmail.com and subscribe to it. Like it and spread that stuff around.

Heather 1:47:22
Absolutely. And in the meantime, be good to the people you love and eat good food and get outside

Bret 1:47:28
or else. I mean yeah get out sorry.

This transcript was generated by https://otter.ai