Host 0:00
Recent favorability ratings show that Americans are not very enthusiastic about either Biden or Trump as the 2020 nominees. And a new proposal by Dr. Brett Weinstein argues that American needs is a unity 2020 ticket. The idea is to have a center left and center right candidate run as a team with the top of the ticket status, determined by a coin flip, they must agree to govern jointly and rotate every four years until the public chooses a new administration, or member bows out of the ticket. Now Brett is a visiting fellow at Princeton's James Madison program. And he's host of his own show and podcast. He joins me now via Skype. Brett, it's great to see you. Thank you so much for joining me.

Bret 0:35
Great to be with you.

Host 0:36
So Brett, let's talk a little bit about this idea. You made a lot of noise when you were on Joe Rogan's podcast about this Darcos duo just explain it a little bit to the audience who may not necessarily have seen it, and let's break it down.

Bret 0:49
Sure, the idea is, many of us have noticed that the Republic is in jeopardy and that our parties have failed us that pervasive corruption has resulted in the American public largely being frozen out of the productivity that they create through their labor. And they're angry, which is why so many of them are in the street. Unfortunately, what's happening in the street is resulting in proposals that will be absolutely disastrous if they are ever implemented. And the Democratic Party is toying with doing just that. So how, in light of the fact that the republicans have delivered us, Donald Trump and the democrats have delivered us, Joe Biden, are we going to put the republic back on course, the proposal involves, as you mentioned, at the top, that we take two candidates, we draft them, one from center left one from center, right, they agree to govern as a team, all decisions made jointly, except where that is impossible. And they would continue on for four years, when they ran for re election, they would reverse positions. And this would continue until one was no longer eligible to run. There are obviously questions that people have about ballot access. And whether or not this ticket is going to play the spoiler, and many people are concerned it could return Donald Trump to office by by dividing democratic votes. That is not the case. There are several different ways in which we deal with that. And I'd be interested in talking to you about whatever, whatever questions you might have. Yeah, I

Host 2:19
mean, well, you have two candidates in mind, I think that that's one thing we should talk a little bit about, which is what really has caused some of the big discussion reveal, you know, if we could talk about who those two candidates are you said Andrew Yang and General mcraven. Why those two candidates do you think are the people who could unite this kind of center left and center right ideology and govern the country? Well?

Bret 2:42
Well, those two candidates are ideal in the sense that they are both above politics. Andrew Yang has obviously played a good political game, but his motivation is clearly honorable. And he is capable of motivating people. So he'd be a perfect candidate from the center left. And Admiral mcraven is obviously a deeply committed patriot who fears little and knows how to get things done, is widely respected. On the right, and amongst people on the left who know him also. So both of these gentlemen would be excellent candidates to rule to govern as a team. And they're, they're both reasonable, patriotic, capable, man.

Host 3:28
I mean, I guess they're all the questions boil down to the realistic nature of all of this right, is that, but I think that one of the things that you're getting to is that we often get trapped, you know, this is one of the major criticized criticisms of the two party system is like, because they lock things in is that you know, the pervasive corruption and that they give Americans a binary choice. Brett, why are you choosing to just reject that framework outright? And say, No, we have a different one?

Bret 3:53
Well, first of all, this is the game, every single election cycle, we are told now is not the time to try to do something different because if you do something different, you will elect the greater evil. And that trap keeps us from ever accomplishing anything, it leaves the duopoly in power. And these dueling influence peddling rackets in a position to control policy. So it's been decades since public policy actually served the public, it's been serving special interests. And at some point, you have to call a halt. Now in this election cycle, we also face the fact that the parties have transparently failed to deliver as anybody capable of the leadership necessary to address the crises that we face. So in some sense, the parties have left us no choice but to go now. So what we have done with this plan is we have solved the problems that usually dog people who advance heterodox ideas about how to address the corruption crisis. And I must tell you, we've got Our first round of numbers back and the numbers say that the design of the plan, the design of the plan is working perfectly in the sense that it does not threaten to spoil the election for several different reasons among them, that the people we are drawing are dead even between former Biden supporters and former Trump supporters. So it does not upset that balance at all. What's more, we're picking up a quarter of our volunteers are people who weren't planning to vote at all in this election. So in many ways, this is functioning exactly as we had hoped. It's the best case scenario. Now your viewership. Yeah, go ahead.

Host 5:40
Go ahead. No, I was just gonna say, let's break some of these numbers down. Let's talk about how you got them and what they mean and some of the key metrics?

Bret 5:47
Well, let's put it this way, it's very difficult for a smaller organization to run a national poll. So we're not talking about national poll numbers, what we're talking about are numbers derived from people who signed up to volunteer with us. So what that does is it corrects for the problems that would happen if we ran a small poll and didn't get an appropriate sample. So among people who are motivated enough to support this idea, they are drawn evenly from both parties. They, you know, if they were going to vote for one of the major party candidates, they are drawn equally from Biden and Trump with a slight increase in the number coming from Trump. So anyway, the short answer is amongst people who are motivated, this is not upsetting the balance. But the primary protection from spoiling is that built into the plan, if as the election approaches this ticket is not viable. That is to say it cannot win, we by agreement will pull the plug on it so that it does not have the potential to to spoil the election.

Host 6:51
Well, what progress Have you made so far, and actually getting these candidates on board with the plan that you're running?

Bret 6:57
Well, we have certainly had conversations and I must say, the off the record conversations that we are having show spectacular interest in this plan, there's a lot of a lot of support based on the fact that the plan is innovative and does take care of the issues that would usually prevent such a plan from being viable. People are of course cautious at this early stage to sign on, because nobody wants to be, you know, back footed if the plan turns out to be tilting at windmills. So what we really need is a groundswell of support, at which point, people will be willing to publicly tell us what we are hearing privately.

Host 7:33
Yeah, well, that's really interesting, Brett, I mean, well, guess what the last part I want to get into is about the ideology of the planet itself, because I've kind of rejected center right and center left, because the way I look at it is that the center left in the center right, very much agree on one thing, and that's continuing the grift and the corruption that's going on. So whenever you say center left, and you say, center, right? What do you mean by that? Because it seems to me that your politics are very much animated by the same as mine, and that we want to get rid of this corruption, we want to escape what's going on here. And that's why we embrace what is viewed as radicals by the center, whereas you're also using the language of centrism. So what do you mean by that?

Bret 8:13
Yeah, I certainly do not mean centrism in the standard way. In fact, I consider myself a radical. Now, I don't believe the same things that most of modern radical America believes. But I do believe we need radical change in order to to save the Republic, I think we're in much graver danger than I think most people recognize. For one thing in this election cycle, we have seen what has unfolded on the left, but the right has not yet played its cards. And I believe that the combination of those two things means that over the next year we are in, we are in grave danger. But the point is this, it doesn't really matter where you are on the political spectrum. In order to save the Republic, we have to meet in the middle, we have to agree on the basics, the fundamental values that make the nation capable of greatness. So meeting in the middle is the natural thing to do. And what I would expect from an administration that was composed in this way, I would expect a a grouping of positions that is not known as a slate to anyone that is to say, presidents do not rule by their own encyclopedic knowledge of how the world functions, they consult people. And if you take two people who are both patriots, that is to say they are not beholden to some special interests, they are actually governing in the interest of the nation. And you have them discussing these issues with the relevant experts, you're going to find that they end up with some conservative positions, some liberal positions, and it will be a very new set of, of policy proposals that the American public has has yet to to encounter. So it is not a centrist proposal, but the center must hold In order for the republic to be protected,

Host 10:02
I think this is a very important point about radicalism and about how we can actually be achieved also in a society in a system of government that's based entirely on compromise. Could you lay out the stakes, it's kind of the last part I want to get with you, which is you talk about the dire stakes of the election about the left and the right, lay that out for the audience.

Bret 10:22
Sure. So here's, here's how I see it. At the moment, what you have is an extremely powerful protest movement in the streets, I don't really think of it as Black Lives Matter, I see it as a hybrid between Black Lives Matter and occupy 2.0. And the, the energy behind that movement is absolutely natural. It is the product of the corruption that has resulted in people seeing a very bleak future. And then, of course, COVID-19, has caused a certain amount of despair and threatens an economic depression. So it is not surprising to see that movement. But what we are seeing is the Democratic Party cynically playing with this ideology, and as much as the movement may be motivated by genuine, natural anger, and by a very real sense that that unfairness is not evenly distributed between the races, the proposals that are being issued by this movement, are absolutely absurd, and threatened to undo every value on which the nation is built. So to have one of our major parties toying with those ideas is very dangerous. But even worse, you now have President Trump, whose poll numbers are sagging, and he, as we know is not likely to take defeat well. So he is certainly going to play cards that he is in a unique position to play as the commander in chief that could be extremely dangerous to us. And so some sort of proposal that restores power to people who have the wisdom and are capable of the sort of responsibility necessary to wield it on our behalf is essential, and really in the short term.

Host 12:07
Well, it's such an important point, Brett, and you know, I'm so glad that you were able to share with our viewers where can they find out more about your project?

Bret 12:16
Well, I've been working with this plan has been very popular amongst Yang gang folks, not just because Andrew Yang is on board, something like 87% of them will remain on board even if Andrew Yang is not one of our candidates, but we have set up a website at articles of unity.org. You can go there and read our white paper, please sign up for our email list. And if you want to volunteer that's available there too. What we need to make this work is a groundswell if we can get that in the next two weeks, this plan can actually work.

Host 12:48
Well there you go from the man himself. Dr. Brett Weinstein, thank you so much.

Bret 12:53
Thank you.

Host 12:54
Absolutely. All right. Well, I'm a rising field. After this.

This transcript was generated by https://otter.ai