Bret 0:23
Hey folks, welcome to our unity 2020 campfire Early Morning Edition. I have the honor of sitting with Governor jesse ventura who is joining us this morning to talk about the Unity ticket, the State of America and all sorts of related concepts. Welcome. Governor Ventura.

Jesse Ventura 0:44
Thank you. My pleasure, great to be here. I'm, I'm sure the knowledge right away, I'm computer illiterate, and I've never owned a cell phone. And I've now made it my life's mission to never own a cell phone. I figure if I live another 15 or 20 years, I can put it on my grave and I might be the only one that can do it.

Bret 1:03
You're gonna be the last holdout I respect that. I have to say, Yeah, they are a Faustian bargain at best. So what I'm going to do is, I'm going to light a couple of candles here as part of our metaphor of campfire. While I explain to our new viewers that fires have played a very important role in human history and prehistory. People have gathered around fires in the evening as their eyes are no longer capable of allowing them to do the work of being human. out in the wild. And when times are good people celebrate, celebrate around fires, when times are not so good. They discuss what's going wrong and what might be done about it. That's why we've used this metaphor. So anyway, I've looked candle for each of us here. Governor Ventura. And so what we are going to do is have a conversation about the state of the country, and what we might be doing about it. So let me say a few other things introducing you you were a navy seal in Vietnam. Is that correct?

Jesse Ventura 2:12
Well, actually, I in my day, we were two units. We were the underwater demolition teams, as well as the navy seals. And when I deployed my first deployment, I was a member of the last underwater demolition team UDP 12, who deployed to Vietnam as an entire team in February of 71. And when they I won't go into detail because a lot of that's classified, but that may broke us down in the different type of deployments. But you all go shoot through the same training I went through CLS vi show you're completely interchangeable. one unit works a little bit more in the water, while the other unit works a little bit more on land.

Bret 2:53
And my right that the skills involved in underwater demolition are also useful in Renegade politics.

Jesse Ventura 3:01
Ah, I guess with the ark of survival, you could throw that in there and you never quit. You know, when you go through buds training and brings it underwater demolition SEAL training is about a half a year long. In comparison, the elite army airborne training is three weeks. And buds training is 26 weeks. And so it's the hardest training known to the United States military, we're probably the only unit that truly has the respect of the United States Marine Corps.

Bret 3:32
Interesting. Well, I should say there is an interesting concentration of I believe it would be fair to say Special Forces folks in our movement and people favored by our movement, Admiral mcraven, Nate Boyer, Dan Crenshaw, Jocko Willink, all of these names are related to unity 2020 in one way or another. So you are in a group of elite Special Forces people associated with recapturing the White House for the American public which I would imagine is a something that we share I believe that that has to be done if we are to write the ship of state

Jesse Ventura 4:19
ahead of us that that you know right now, I question our leadership a great deal. It that is a tough job I mean, let's not denied being the head President of the United States is no walk in the park, you know, I was a governor and being ahead of a state is difficult and and I can only imagine when you're the head guy of 50 states, what you have to deal with on a daily basis, but it's something that that requires your total concentration. I don't think you should be playing golf on the weekends when you have a pandemic loose in the country, and things of that nature. I think that you should be putting in 40 to 60 hour work weeks at a minimum.

Bret 5:05
Yes, I think it's a job no rational person could want. What one hopes is that somebody who feels the feels the call will take the office out of a sense of duty. And that seems to be a much better model. At the moment, what we seem to have is a system in which people with unbridled ambition seem to end up in this office and it has not served us well. Well, I

Jesse Ventura 5:33
I was told and this was interesting by an outlaw biker. Are you familiar with one percenters outlaw bikers? Why don't you give us a refresher? A one percenters now launch the bikers that people fear. And, you know, I was with some a few months ago, and one of them said something very profound to me. He said, You need to be the next president. And I said, Why is that? He said, Because you're the only one that doesn't want the job. Yep. If you think about that for a moment, and this coming from an outlaw biker, that's pretty perceptive of stating, you want the person who doesn't want the job, but feels obligated because of his patriotism and love and everything that he will do the job, even though he really wouldn't make it his first choice of four years of employment.

Bret 6:28
So how familiar are you with the Unity 2020 proposal?

Jesse Ventura 6:32
Not too familiar. I know that they I know that they seem to want to draft someone for president and apparently and it was news to me that that's apparently what happened in the case of Dwight Eisenhower, which I had no idea of. And again, it falls back to our what we're taught in school, which I think is highly questionable today. The things I'm learning today, I'm now questioning why wasn't I taught this in school? Why did I know anything about this in school prime example, that thing in Tulsa, Oklahoma with the black people, never once in school, was I ever talked about that major event where the black people were slaughtered in Tulsa, Oklahoma, that wasn't taught in school when I went there. So you know, to me, it's a case of, you know, we got to get our history in line and start telling the public the truth, no matter how much it hurts, the truth is what it is

Bret 7:34
yes. And I would imagine that an honorable team at the head of our government would view the repair or the replacement of school with something that properly functioned as a high priority, because as George Carlin said, the purpose of school is to make you just smart enough to operate the machines. And it turns out, actually, we offshored the machines, so even that's not necessary anymore. It's time to make school function. And you can deduce an awful lot, not from what's taught in school. But what what's absent from the curriculum. You're quite right about that.

Jesse Ventura 8:08
And unfortunately, we've lost the voice of George Carlin, which we so dire need today. We need George Carlin back if there's any way to resurrect Yemen, Muhammad Ali, those are the two people that we need to bring back from the dead.

Bret 8:24
I agree. I missed them both Bill Hicks as well, there, there are a number of people whose help we could use at this moment. So let me tell you about unity 2020s proposal because it isn't really as simple as electing a president who's feels called by patriotism to do the job. Part of the problem with that is, you know, as a an independent politician, you've been both a mayor and a governor, as governor, you were elected in the Reform Party, if my understanding is correct,

Jesse Ventura 8:56
no, no, actually, I was elected from the Independence Party of Minnesota. We then after I was elected, ultimately aligned with the Reform Party. And then when we realized the Reform Party was not a real third party movement. It was only the movement of ross perot. We then disenfranchised while I was still in office and went back to being the Independence Party of Minnesota. Now we in Minnesota, if you get a candidate that gets 5% of the vote in a statewide election, you then qualify as a major party. And we had Jean Barclay ran, and he got over 5% of the Minnesota vote. And so the Independence Party then achieved major party status in the state of Minnesota. And what won the election for me was they allowed me in the debates, because at the primary, I was polling 9% Hubert Humphrey, skip Humphrey was at 46% and Mayor or former senator norm coleman was at about 33%. Coleman never changed through the whole election from the from the. From his polling, he was always within the margin of error. Humphrey dropped from 46 to 28. I went up to 37 because also they predicted only a 50% voter turnout because it was a non presidential, it turned out they were wrong. 60% came out, I was pulling 27% the day before the election, they didn't count on that. 10% I won with 37%. That is the key. The key is to hit the 50% of people in this country that do not vote, you must motivate them to come out. Give them a reason to do it. I did it Minnesota. They told me not to go to college campuses. They told me young people didn't vote. I told them they've never had Jesse the body before sent me to every campus you got in this state and I did. They were sold out to the rafters. And let me brag for a moment and state the headlines in the Minneapolis paper after I won, Ventura wins. sub headline throngs of young voters provide the margin. So I got to the young people, and they put me over the top.

Bret 11:18
So interesting that you should say that because we did polling when we started this, this endeavor, we polled people who signed up to volunteer their time. So these are people committed enough to do more than just give us an email address. And what we found the plan for reasons you'll see shortly when I explain it, the plan brought people almost evenly from the left and the right would be Trump supporters and would be Biden supporters. But the thing that was most heartening about it was that a quarter of the people who signed up to volunteer with us, we're not going to vote for anybody until they ran into Unity 2020. These are disaffected voters who are showing up in large numbers. And that pattern has continued we have more recent data from people who have watched our campfires and participated in our data collection effort. So I think one thing that is clearly true is that party loyalists are having a hard time figuring out how to dismiss unity 2020, because it doesn't trigger any of the things that they usually use to silence efforts that are outside of the duopoly. In other words, they usually tell you, well, maybe that's a good idea. But you can't do it this year, because this year is too important, and You'll spoil the election. But we don't spoil the election, we've designed the plan specifically to avoid any possibility of that. And it seems to work. But it is also true that the parties are in no position to lecture us on our moral obligations. If we're bringing people back into civic life, who were so fed up that they weren't planning to vote. That's something we should all desire. And the fact that the parties aren't interested in it is very telling.

Jesse Ventura 13:00
Oh, yeah, very much. So like I said, they count Minnesota and may usually lead the nation and voter turnout when we're battling Maine. Ironically, when I was governor, the only other independent governor was angus king from Maine. So the two states that have the highest voter per capita turnout, also were the two states that elected independent governors back in 1998. I got all the press, but Angus actually preceded me by four years. He was in his second four year term when I was entering my first four year journey, but it just showed, you'll get the biggest voter turnout, if you have a third choice, some legitimate third choice that people can go to, because like I said, in Minnesota, they projected a 50% voter turnout, it turned out to be 60. I was pulling 27% in a three way race. I won with 37. So it was that 10% that they did not count on that showed up at the polls. You know, when we knew we were going to win it. We have we have also saved a registration here, which makes it great. We found out the morning of the election at the University of Minnesota, the lines were around the block to vote. And that's that morning when we said by God, we're going to win this thing, because there were more and they also stated more people were lining up to register than were lining up to vote. So I knew they're not registering to vote for a democrat or republican newly they're registering because someone else has entered the game. And I happen to be the fortunate one who did that.

Bret 14:41
Yes, you can tell that the parties aren't really interested in governing because they aren't really interested in how many people are involved in the process. They're only interested in whether or not they can freeze out other efforts and whether or not they can win power that they can then sell to the highest So an awful lot of us have recognized that that process can't possibly work in the nation's interest.

Jesse Ventura 15:06
The big thing for me is this about them. If you watch the Democrats and Republicans, both of them, they put their party first. The party comes before the country. Look at the examples of that you have shown right now with Mitch McConnell, just blocking anything they can do to President Trump. So Trump has McConnell in his back pocket, they can't do a thing to him, he can run him up out there, do anything he basically wants him as long as the Senate will convict him of anything. He's free to do it. And that's the big problem. They put their party first, then who comes second? their big donors, the big corporations, the people that give them the big money? They're the second time Jamie, who's third on the list? Well, third is probably their own personal viewpoint may come in at that point number three, and where do the people stand? I would give us fourth. But I may be wrong, something could sneak in. And we could actually be fifth. I haven't figured out fourth fully yet. But we're no better than fourth right now. Again, it's party first, big time, money donors. Second, personal opinion. Third,

Bret 16:21
yeah, they they laugh at us behind our backs, we are basically patsies in their influence peddling operation. And you know, this has actually been established. Now it's been scientifically studied, and the interest of the public have almost no influence on policy at this point. And it's precisely because the parties have a business model that does not involve actually governing. It's also Incidentally, tearing the country apart, because they're selling us symbolism, and they're selling us the demonization of other Americans rather than actually doing their job. So I'm sure we're in almost complete agreement about that, if not complete agreement. But let me tell you, the what is making unity 2020 difficult for the parties to dismiss is the structure. The structure involves not electing somebody who is outside of the parties, but drafting a team of two people one from the left and one from the right, under an agreement that they will govern by consensus, somebody has to be the top of the ticket, obviously, that person would be chosen by coin flip. And after four years, the, the positions would reverse and the President would run as vice president. And this could go on until one party had been president twice, at which point they'd have to be replaced by someone new, and the system could go on indefinitely. So that structure a reduces the chance of spoiling the election to almost zero, we also have a failsafe, which is if the ticket cannot win at the point that the election is approaching, we pull the plug on it and the election reverts to its prior state. But it also seems to assure people as we hoped it would, that when decisions are made at the level of the chief executive, that their values and interests will be represented in the room, and that what is done will be that which is in the public's interest, rather than special interests.

Jesse Ventura 18:29
And that sounds wonderful. I guess I'd piggyback on that. My best answer would be to also include the Constitution of the United States of America. Because it seems to me today, the two parties, that it's a worthless document that is there only in name only, nobody follows that nobody goes by the rules of it. I mean, how many wars are we involved in now? And yet, we've never declared a war since World War Two. Now, it bothers me tremendously today, because I'm a Vietnam veteran. But technically, I'm a war criminal. I served my country, but I'm a war criminal. Why? Because the United States never did actually declare war in Vietnam. So therefore, the Geneva Convention doesn't apply to any of us. We are all war criminals, because our own government and politicians wouldn't declare the war, my position simple, I'm very anti war. And you'd have to convince me greatly that the United States is in dire trouble and asked to defend itself. But on the flip side, if the Congress, I want the Congress to declare war, so that then as a president, you can carry out that declaration of when they don't declare war, that it isn't a war, and that's what we're involved in today. So I would add to you the Constitution of the United States. needs to be followed. It's not just a document there to look good. It's the law of the land. And it's about time we get elected officials that pay attention to the law of the land.

Bret 20:12
Well, I would certainly agree with you. I think the Constitution is a spectacular document, I must confess, I think there are elements of it that I think are out of date. And that's no, that's not a bad reflection on the founding fathers, they couldn't possibly have understood the world that that document would have to function in. But at the moment, we don't even treat the spirit of it with any sort of reverence which, you know, your point about the executive declaring war by playing word games and calling things, police actions and the like, that's obviously a violation of the spirit of the document. And, yes, it is about time that we we stopped behaving that way.

Jesse Ventura 20:55
It's beyond the Spirit. The document says, clearly, Congress shall declare war, it does. Spirit involves there isn't black and white? Well, I

Bret 21:06
agree that this is what I'm saying is we have violated the spirit of the document. And you don't find us you answer. No, I appreciate it, then, you know, I'm quite disturbed about the abandonment of the core principles there. In fact, you know, you can make a strong argument that the NDA of 2012 violated, or at least sets up the violation of every one of the rights enumerated in the Bill of Rights except possibly your third amendment, right? So anyway, I'm very disheartened that we have treated the documents so badly.

Jesse Ventura 21:46
And let me add this, there are things in the constitution that should be changed. Now give you one, right now, the Electoral College, let's get rid of the Electoral College. It's an elitist system. It's totally outdated. The only reason that was in place was because at that time, you didn't have communication, and everyone had to ride on horseback to Washington. My answer to that is when's the last time somebody went on horseback to Washington? And the point is, then you hear the argument? Well, everyone will forget about the little states because they'll only care about the big states with the people. I got news for you. If I'm running for president, and I've given the option to campaign in California or Montana, which one you think I'm going to, I'm going to the one with all the electoral votes, not the one with two or three. So that's a false argument, when they say that the candidate won't pay attention to the little state, they're not going to anyway, any more than they have to they're going to go where the masses are. And to me, how can you have an electoral system where somebody who gets the most votes loses? I mean, that doesn't happen for mayor, Governor, Senator, Congress, even dog catcher, if you vote on that, the guy who a guy or girl who gets the most votes wins, except the presidency. Now, that's utterly ridiculous, in my opinion, well,

Bret 23:21
you know, this is not going to be popular. And the fact is what I think about this doesn't make any difference, because I'm not running for office, right? This is just one man's opinion. But there are arguments both ways the current instantiation of the electoral college is an abomination. The fact is, it's been captured by the parties, and they use it as a mechanism to ensure that nothing that they don't like happens at the level of presidential politics, it's one more mechanism for ensuring that they remain in control. That said, the idea of a body that could prevent a catastrophe in the event of something happened strikes me as potentially positive as long as it left the will of the public intact as it function. Now, I agree with you, there is a perverse incentive to visit big states and pay attention to them, rather than states that are sparsely populated. So there's a lot to talk about with respect to what the electoral college should be. And certainly there's no defense for what it is. But But nonetheless, it's it's it's a complex, complex

Jesse Ventura 24:29
issue. I don't think so. I think it's very simple. He who gets he or she who gets the most votes deserves to win.

Bret 24:38
I believe that should generally be the case.

Jesse Ventura 24:40
Everything else is bogus. Anything else is bogus. Look at for all the years, the delegates didn't even have to vote the way their state wanted them to. Your state could vote for one candidate, but you as a delegate could go there and vote a different a different candidate. What kind of nonsense was that? Then they're just cleaning that up. Now in some states, it's still that that way in other states. So you've got an elitist group that choose it. So truthfully, when you vote for president, your vote don't count. Because he is an elected by you, he or she isn't elected by you. They're elected by the Electoral College. So that that may be the biggest reason we're talking about why people don't vote today, because they know their vote is meaningless.

Bret 25:31
Well, we agree that the current form of the Electoral College is a tremendous problem and an obstacle to democracy. I guess the question is, do we need a failsafe or don't we? But anyway, maybe a conversation for a different time? Yeah. Yeah. All right. So what do you think about a power sharing arrangement where right and left engage in patriotic decision making on behalf of the public?

Jesse Ventura 25:59
Well, I think it sounds good on paper. But I think getting it to actually work will be super will be the true challenge of it. I mean, it might look good. And people might talk it up great. And say, Oh, yeah, we're all going to, we're all going to sing Kumbaya by the fire now. But will that be the reality of the situation? dealing with politicians? I don't think so. Well, we're

Bret 26:22
not talking about dealing with politicians. We're talking about dealing with people who have been chosen by the Unity movement for their ability to honor that agreement. You're among

Jesse Ventura 26:32
them. They choose the right person. Well, they've

Bret 26:35
chosen six people who can be composed into nine tickets, we haven't yet had our vote. So we don't know what ticket it is that we are going to draft. But you're, you're a new experiment, is a new experiment.

Jesse Ventura 26:51
And we got to see what happens when you throw the dirty pants in the washer. Yep. So if you found yourself clean, or do they come out still dirty? Right?

Bret 27:01
Yeah, I guess it depends how dirty they are. But I'm, I'm a fan of the idea that if the right people are chosen, and I believe six excellent people have been chosen by our membership, that this plan can work because one of the components that is required of our candidates is that they be patriotic. Alright, the other two, they have to be capable, and they have to be courageous. And I believe if you put two capable, courageous patriots together and you say, the nation needs you that they will do the right thing that those characteristics are sufficient to ensure it. I hope you're right. Excellent. All right. So if you found yourself in the White House, let's say as part of a partnership, and you need a

Jesse Ventura 27:55
radical now I don't want to lose my job or my health care by them saying I'm running.

Bret 28:00
So you're dealing out verbally

Jesse Ventura 28:02
right now, I do not want to lose at this time, my health care or my job, which I would lose both if I run at this moment. So this is completely hypothetical.

Bret 28:13
It's, it's a thought experiment. Nobody has been drafted. Very. Alright. So in this thought experiment, let's say you found yourself in the White House, elected through I don't want to call it a third party because I don't think of unity 2020 as a third party, but it is outside of the two party system, if you were to be elected, as part of that structure. And you were faced with a congress that was composed of members of the duopoly, do you think you'd be able to work with them to get things done?

Jesse Ventura 28:46
Well, I already did it.

Bret 28:49
Who

Jesse Ventura 28:49
the only guy that you got on your list of six who's already dead it when I was elected Minnesota, I was by myself. We have no independence, we did gain 101 democrat got booted up north, a great guy, and I fought for him and got in my minority position. So they had to honor him as a minority representative. He was our only one halfway through But getting back on track. When I got elected, I had a a democratic senate and a Republican House. Right. For the first three years, whoever I sided with generally prevailed because it was two to one. For the first let me say that again, the first three years I can tell you exactly what will happen when they're done that third year is when the Democrats and Republicans jumped in bed together. They started singing Kumbaya, by the fire together reunited, the state of Minnesota has Democratic and Republican parties to propose who me the common sense middle now. There Debt against me in my third year. My job as governor is to submit the budget. I submitted the budget, they declined it. They came back with their own budget, not the governor's budget, their budget. It was fiscally irresponsible. I vetoed it. They sent it back a second, they overrode my veto sent it back to me a second time. I vetoed it again, which was all that I could do. They overrode me a second time. And that budget went into effect. Well, they thought they were going to get me with that budget. Because I now I have to operate under. So that was one of the reasons as well as multiple others why I didn't seek reelection. I didn't want to operate on their budget, because I knew it was fiscally irresponsible to do so. Lo and behold, I was right. What happened after I left office, that they were banking on a strong economy, they were rolling the dice that that was going to happen, not good policy fiscally, to gamble with the people's money. They failed. Minnesota had a $5 billion deficit they had to deal with Why? Because the Democrats and Republicans teamed up and got political together to overrule the seated governor who brought forward a fiscally responsible budget. But they didn't want none of that they were going to exercise their power. So see, I've been there and done that. I know exactly how it would work. If I were elected president, hypothetically, it would take me three years to unite the Democrats and Republicans back in bed together, because the thing they fear most is a third entity. They fear that more than anything else they talk about, they don't want a third entity in the game. And when that entity comes into the game, rest assured within four our four years, the dems and repubs will be back in total unity, you'll see how wonderful they get along. So that is how in one way you're save the nation.

Bret 32:08
Well, I mean, that's not a very hopeful story at some level, because the Democrats and Republicans uniting to thwart the governor is a

Jesse Ventura 32:16
lot the truth don't Yeah, I sure do. There it is.

Bret 32:21
So that's what you're gonna deal with? Well, if I can push back a little bit, they do have a third entity at the moment, Donald Trump was not exactly a Republican, and he seems to have decapitated the republican party and taken it over successfully. So while you might have imagined that the Democrats and Republicans would have conspired against him, that's not what we saw. We saw something else. So I'm not sure that the pattern you suggest, which I do believe is real and likely, is the only pattern we can see other phenomenon.

Jesse Ventura 33:03
I disagree with you. Because the moment Donald Trump, Donald Trump came to visit me after I won, Donald Trump also use my playbook to get elected. But the moment Donald Trump declared he was a Republican, that ended any likeness to me, became a Republican. When he entered the Republican primary, he was not a third entity, then he was a Republican, just like Bernie Sanders. Bernie likes to tell everybody he's an independent. And yet, I find Bernie is nothing more than a Democrat, because I approached Bernie Sanders when he was in 2016. And I was gonna break my cardinal rule, I actually thought about endorsing him. I went down to call those people went on, he wouldn't give me the time of day, when he finally did, he gave me 30 seconds in a hallway. And I asked him one question, I said, Senator Sanders, if you lose the Secretary Clinton, will you support a party movement? Or will you yourself run as a third candidate? He looked at me and says, No, I'm 100%. Support Secretary Clinton. I walked down the building, knowing he's nothing but a Democrat. He's just masking as an independent. He isn't truly an independent, he's a democrat. And so getting back on touch Trump as a Republican, when he ran for that office, you're not going to tell me that they're a third entity. When they join a party and run under that party's label for snow. They are now part of the republican party and they are part of the Democratic Party. They are not independence. Neither was Donald Trump. The only thing he did different instead of going to fundraisers, he did what I did, he went to rallies, where do you think he got that idea from? I went to rallies on college campuses, all the soda and all that Trump watched and he saw how work while Hillary was there collecting big money, Donald Trump was out meeting the people like jesse ventura.

Bret 35:06
Well, I see a big difference between Sanders and Trump, I think there were reflections of the same stration. And therefore, you know, they told us something about the state of the electorate in 2016. But effectively, Trump muscled in on the republicans action. And Sanders was an independent, but he has played party loyalist, which I must say, is where he last time, I was a supporter in 2016 of Sanders, and at that point, he endorsed Clinton, I had the sense that this is now a dead end. And I wish I didn't have to say that because I, as much as I disagree with Sanders about policy, I greatly respect his ability to exist as an independent inside the duopoly. And frankly, I think whatever it is, that goes on inside the Democratic Party reflects a level of control that the people outside need to understand it has control this primary so that primary entities that believe something different, you know, Andrew Yang, Tulsi Gabbert, Bernie Sanders are all shut down early in favor of these sort of DNC standard bearers, and they won't survive are our continuing down that path.

Jesse Ventura 36:37
Well, you know, I'm not gonna, I'm not gonna make excuse of Democrats from how they run their operation of the republicans who run theirs. But to me, unless you're running with an eye in front of your name, as an independent, belong to those two parties, and all the people that Bernie and Trump and all them ran with the party designation, by their names. So essentially, they are those parties to become their candidates. And so, you know, you and I may beg to differ on that a little bit. But to me, an independent visit is an independent through, you don't join one party, because it's politically advantage advantageous for you at the moment. And then, you know, and which is what Trump in my opinion, when he joined the republicans up, he'd want me anymore, he wasn't trying to do what I wanted to do. And Bernie the same way, but he's a democrat, he might be independent now that by his name, but the reality is, he's a democrat. Well,

Bret 37:37
so I think maybe this is the very important thing that we have to discuss with each other, because your point about independent I resonate with, but I don't think it goes far enough, because there are too many ways to be dependent. And that in effect, the Unity movement is about bringing all of those who have recognized that we have a critical problem in our electoral system together on the basis that the thing that should unite all of us is the well being of the nation and the interests of citizens. And so the Unity movement is really not about being independent from the parties, it is about joining together to overthrow them. And I see that as the only path forward.

Jesse Ventura 38:26
And you may be right. I don't necessarily sit in and say that my way is any better than me. all I'll say is good luck. Well, as your your first of all, you're going to get infiltrated badly by the two parties, they're going to stand opposite. And they're going to disrupt things and they're going to make it as horrible as they possibly can for all of you in that in that situation. Because remember, satisfaire in love war in politics. They're the dirtiest players out there. And it's the dirtiest business out there. And when you're being involved in the business, you know what you feel like you need a good hot shower. Just being part of just being part of what happened, which I've done. For what now eight years I've been elected mayor, I beat both parties. When I was elected mayor Brooklyn Park, both It was a nonpartisan election of leaders in the state of Minnesota co signed the letter and Senate to every citizen in Brooklyn Park, calling me the most dangerous man in the city. Well, I want to 67% of the 3% against the 20 year incumbent endorsed by both major political parties. So you know, if you want to bring the dems in was together if they're willing to do that, that's a wonderful thing. But I challenge you, I want to see the Democratic Republic singing Kumbaya together, you know, for the country because I just don't see them. going that direction?

Bret 40:01
Oh no, I'm not suggesting that we unify the Democrats and Republicans, I think those two parties are beyond redemption. I want to unify the people who understand that, that everybody who understands that and believes in the nation has an interest in joining together in order to break their stranglehold on power. That's the point. So that's what unity is about. It's the unity of the people outside the duopoly and those inside who have ears to hear that there is a problem, right? Those people will all very naturally want to do whatever is necessary to eliminate that corrupt duopoly power structure because it works against the interests of the people, and it works against the long term interests of the nation.

Jesse Ventura 40:48
Yep. And you're going to need to look at this as probably a, at least minimum of a 10 year, a 10 year thing has to happen. Because I don't believe that and I don't see it happening, fully integrated. It'll take at least 10 years to break the stranglehold.

Bret 41:08
To fully break it, it might there's a reason that we're starting with the office of president because I believe the office of president has the greatest power, you know, the the bully pulpit as it were.

Jesse Ventura 41:21
It's like when the mafia leader said if you're gonna kill john kennedy, you cut off the head of the dog, not the pale. So jello?

Jesse Ventura 41:35
Kennedy afficionado, I've studied his murder for most of my adult life, I find it extremely interesting reading. It's

Bret 41:43
a it's a fascinating event. And we were trying to explain the complexity of it to our children at dinner the other day, because it whatever it is, that happened haunts the nation to this day, it's almost like things stopped making sense in 1963. And they have never gone back to making sense.

Jesse Ventura 42:05
Sure, you are, in my opinion, exactly correct. You and I sit complete together on that. We have not been the same country since the coup d'etat took place in 63. And you notice I called it a coup d'etat?

Bret 42:20
I did not. So you mentioned that one of the things the Unity movement should expect his infiltration. And I don't think it's just infiltration we, you know, at the very initial conversations that we had, as we formed the movement, we talked about the fact that we knew that that was coming. And we also knew that other weapons would be brought to bear against us. This week, we've seen this happen in spectacular form where Twitter suspended our Twitter or official Twitter account suspended the account of volunteers that are part of our organization. And they that may be the most interesting thing is they they triggered or installed some mechanism, that when you attempt to tweet a link to our website, this is not Twitter. This is off site, where we distribute information about our movement, if you attempt to tweet it, it will not allow the tweet to go out it gives you a warning that the content is understood to be potentially harmful. So this strikes me as an absolutely egregious abuse of power on Twitter's part, and it basically indicates that they are aware of the threat that a unity movement that holds no truck with these parties poses to the influence that they unfairly have over government.

Jesse Ventura 43:44
Well take that as a badge of honor. Take that you're getting their attention. I would love to add to this, you're falling into the same thing. Do you remember my show piercey theory?

Bret 43:56
I have to tell you. I don't I think I saw

Jesse Ventura 44:01
Okay, that's fine. But I did a show called conspiracy on TV, where we covered a lot of their conspiracies, and we were going to do it telling both sides. But a lot of them deal with the government and when the government they're not going to cooperate. So we ended up just telling the conspiracy side and then we allow the people to decide on their own. Well, what I'm getting back to is you're going to get pushed back because you know you can get my conspiracy theory shows anywhere on the internet today. They wipe them clean. What's your steam the disc jockey in Chicago, I forget his name. Off the top of my head big distracted, he had all the shows he came home from work one day went to go one and were wiped off his computer. And so the government you cannot get my conspiracy theory shows anymore, to watch it and to show the things that I showed her the thing up in Alaska and all the Well, I showed the internment camps. And I got read off on the floor of Congress, and they tried to turn over to the anti defamation League, you know, because I made the comparison and showed a photo of the ones in Germany to the ones we're building. And they look identical on the defamation league never even contacted me. I think they looked at the pictures and said, He's right. You know, so bear in mind, they'll come after you with guns, they've already come out. You can't get my show. It's just that I did. And a lot of them showed some pretty, you know, I got read off on the floor of Congress by Senator Cohn.

Bret 45:39
My hope is, and I think this is already beginning to happen is that, you know, we know they will come after us. And we know that based on the fact that honorable governance would completely restructure who the winners and losers are that all of the current winners are liable to, to oppose it. So basically, we are expecting a huge amount of power to be arrayed against us, as we show signs of having the potential to actually change things. But as that power comes after us, it reveals the importance of this. In other words, its flak over the target. And to the extent that people are paying attention, and they notice that we are facing these things, they will come to understand why it is that the movement has to exist, and why they should join it. So we can't avoid it, I think we just have to, to lean into the fact that gulyas ire is an indication that this must be done.

Jesse Ventura 46:46
And look at it this way, the more they come after you is they fear you. So if they're ignoring you, you're not having an impact. So if they if they're focusing on you, then clearly you're having any look at it from that perspective to

Bret 47:02
Yes, I don't think they're afraid of our winning yet, I believe they should be more afraid of it. But I believe that they are angered over the fact that we say in very plain terms, that they are an influence peddling racket. And much of their power derives from the fact that we speak about them as if they're actually interested in governance. And the parties are clearly not interested in governance, they're interested in capturing power and selling it to the highest bidder. And frankly, anybody who's paying attention can see that. So if we say it out loud, it frustrates them. Because it It reveals what they're up to. It's you know, we're pulling back the curtain. At some point, they will recognize that the frustration and anger that they have created in people is going to bite them, and it's going to usher them out of power, hopefully soon enough to save the nation.

Jesse Ventura 47:56
Just make sure when you pull back the curtain, there's an audience there to see it.

Bret 48:03
All right. Well, that's a excellent concept. I like it. Can you put any flesh on that bones? How do you do that?

Jesse Ventura 48:14
Do that no, I'm sorry.

Bret 48:16
I liked your advice. When you pull back. Well, what

Jesse Ventura 48:18
I mean is what I mean, is this, getting the American I'll be blowing the American people off their ass enough to pay attention. You know, again, you got 50% of Americans that don't vote, and I sit my head going, how can you not vote when the government takes half your money? You go to work 40 days, 40 hours a week, the government takes out half of it when you do that, shouldn't you pay attention to who's taking your livelihood and your money? And yet you got american people that don't care. They just fives don't bother me. As long as it's smooth. As long as my life isn't interrupted. It's all okay. But see, now their lives have been in a rush, they actually are being asked to wear masks. And we can't even get people to do that. We can't even get American people to guard their fellow American wear a freakin mask. And I use my mother as an example. My mom spent her entire adult life wearing a mask. She was head neurosurgery at North Memorial Hospital in Minnesota. She was in surgery all week. You wear a mask in there. These people that talk about old masks and witty thing. I challenged him then the next time you have surgery, tell the doctors and nurses they don't have to wear masks at the surgery. You know, germs Okay, you don't have to worry about them. See, we can't even get people with their own lives on the line to wear something as simplistic as I mean did you see last night they booed what They announced that the Trump thing that masks are required the crowd erupted and booze. That's who you're dealing with, you're now you're dealing with the public that that? You're, I don't know, maybe you're giving them more credit for intelligence that, you know, maybe that's the problem, you believe they have more intelligence than what I'm dumbfounded over the fact that we don't even have the self discipline that shows me nobody's been in the military. Because if you've been in the military, you know what discipline is. And you know that when you're in a situation where you wear a mask to pretend to protect your fellow citizens, and You're so selfish, that you won't wear one. And yet, that's what we have in America, they told us by December 70,000, meet people like more are going to die, because we won't wear a mask. I'm only saying that to say to you, good luck motivating these people.

Bret 51:00
Well, I appreciate that. What I would hope is that people recognize especially people who were not planning to vote, that if they want to wield power, if they're not voting, because they know that their vote doesn't matter. They can join us and they can matter right away, right, to the extent that they empower the Unity movement that is going to motivate the parties, it's going to frighten them. And so if they want to wield power in the system, the way to do it, is to join forces against the parties that have made their vote irrelevant. And it seems straightforward to me. As for reaching them? Well, apparently, we are 25% of our volunteers. We're not planning to vote that tells us something important. But you know, it's also the case that we are, of course, up against a I don't know how intentional it is, presumably it's somewhat intentional. But you know, the media and the social media platforms are all effectively in line, if not, because they've been erected into a bulwark to prevent people from wielding power, then because they enjoy having undue influence, and they're looking to protect it.

Jesse Ventura 52:14
Let me give you a quick story, you'll love to hear when I came out of office in 2003. This is a true story. I was the hottest commodity out there I was the voice of the independent, CNN, MSNBC, and Fox got it more for me. msnbc one, I signed a three year contract with them. I was going to be on seven o'clock, right when Matt always or whenever I was going to be five nights a week. And but the guy who hired me, told me in a car and he wouldn't say who He said He got a phone call from Washington to very high ups who wanted to know why they were giving me a National Forum. You know, after I'd been the independent governor of Minnesota National Forum, well, guess what? We set the whole show up, we're all ready to go on the air. And we get an interesting phone call. And here's the phone call is in governor Ventura doesn't support the invasion of Iraq. This was right before the invasion of Iraq. My assistance and old know he's vehemently opposed to it. He's a Vietnam veteran. He says this is Vietnam all over again. On the other end, does New Jersey nor does Connecticut know about this meaning the big headquarters? We don't know. Here came the big question. Is there any chance you change his mind? And my subordinate says I don't think so. This is a military thing. policemen's military had the governor he's opposed to the Iraq war. Guess what? My show wasn't allowed on the air. They had just hired phil donahue the date guy. He was their highest rated show he likewise oppose the war in Iraq. He was pulled from the air. Now have you ever heard of a network pulling their top rated show and then not even letting me on? And it was all because they wanted no voices out there of opposition to the invasion of Iraq. So when you think that mainstream media out there is in bought and sold by our government, there's your example, right? They're opposing the Iraq War cost millions of dollars that I would have made with msnbc as a show host on there. How much would I be making a year if I could have gotten the opportunity to do that, but because I had a position of anti war against the Iraq War, it costs me and what happened? They didn't come the air but they paid me for the whole three years and my contract said I couldn't do any news programs or anything I'm cable or satellite television was I was handcuffed and tape was put over my mouth. Because I honor contracts, and they paid me the whole three years and bought my silence. Wow, true story. True story.

Bret 55:09
Yep, I believe it. Sometimes they need to go to war for reasons that they know. And we don't. All right. So thank you very much for joining us. I have a couple of announcements, you really appreciate your willingness to talk to us about the Unity movement. And voting begins soon. If you were part of our movement, and you signed up in time. We have

Jesse Ventura 55:37
let me add something, let me throw some out for everybody. Sure, keep the Unity movement going. I'm behind you all the way. Go for it. You know, you'll get no opposition from me on it and is better than the two choices we have. Now. I think your movements outstanding, but I understand you got a long road to home, because taking on these studies, is going to be a full time job with overtime and you're going to get paid for it. So good luck to you. Good luck to the Unity Party, I can support you in any way I will be happy to do so.

Bret 56:12
Well, I really appreciate that. Governor Ventura, your support means a lot. And I also appreciate your message to our viewers. I think they do need that encouragement, and they need to encourage others so people should spread the word. All right. Now two announcements, I'm going to ask you to sign up for our email list, especially with the platforms opposing our movement. You need to sign up for the email list in order to be able to receive information about what we're up to. So you can sign up for the email list at articles of unity.org. You can also sign up at my Twitter account, I will keep people apprised of important developments at Brett Weinstein. There is a podcast unity now run by our volunteers which is a continuation of themes of the campfire. And we will see you next time on the next campfire. Thanks governor Ventura. Be well Thank you. All right.

This transcript was generated by https://otter.ai