Greg Ellis 1:33
didn't have time to get the camera

Bret 1:35
Alright, folks, welcome to the Unity 2020 campfire I am very pleased to be joined today by Greg Ellis and Elizabeth sweet Elizabeth you met on our last campfire Greg Ellis you may be familiar with from various places including my podcast, the Dark Horse podcast. I've also been on his podcast. He's the host of the respondent, in addition to being an actor, a director, and the founder of Monkey toes studio. He's also a an early adopter of unity 2020 and quickly becoming one of my favorite people. So welcome to both Greg and Elizabeth.

Greg Ellis 2:16
Thank you, Brad. It's a pleasure to be here. Hi, Elizabeth. How are you? Hi,

Elisabeth Sweet 2:21
great. Thanks. Thanks for having me back.

Bret 2:24
So I thought I've had this thought it's been hovering just outside of consciousness for some time, but I've been thinking that in light of the fact that we have chosen the campfire metaphor, and for those who are joining us for the first time, let me just say that the reason we speak of campfire is that human beings for millions of years have gathered around fires and presumably as our capacity to discuss difficult situations grew. People will have spent time around the campfire exchanging ideas about what is going wrong and what might be done about it. So it seems the perfect thing for for unity. So anyway, what I had been thinking was that perhaps there should be some fire involved just sort of ceremonially. Now I think I have suggested this too late for Greg to be able to get candles into his studio, but as it happens, Greg, I have an extra one here for you. Elizabeth I think you were able to procure a candle we do not need to know how you went about doing that. We assumed that it was for a good cause and therefore your means were surely justified. So what I think we should do is just light these candles I can say Elizabeth you're not in California are you? Oh you are in California. Can you do us a favor please like these candles very carefully. Alright, well alright, so I'm gonna light a candle. This one's for you, Greg.

Greg Ellis 3:55
Thank you, Brett. I appreciate that. Yeah,

Bret 3:59
no problem. And I would just say it is not an absolute requirement but for people joining in the campfires at home that it would be good in the future. If you had a little fire you could bring to bear yourself alright

Elisabeth Sweet 4:21
good I tried to use a match but it didn't work so I'm using the barbecue lighter instead has a backup yes it's

Greg Ellis 4:27
just a cold around the campfire I did bring a bring a hat that I can put on either scarf if need to be and I got some English candy as well. Which I can share a bit bit loud you know, blank

Bret 4:41
organic English candy is in many ways better than a lot of American candy. This is something that the English take great pride in. Am I right about that Greg?

Greg Ellis 4:49
You are You are spot on right? Yes, I am. I particularly love my English chocolate and my crisps you call them chips we call them crisps or chips or french fries. It could get very complicated.

Bret 5:03
Yes, I actually think chips is a more charming term. And french fries is just an incorrect term. So I don't know why we use that. But, but so be it. Alright, well, I guess I should say for those who are joining us, you should log into the democracy AI portal so that you can exchange information with us. Oh, Elizabeth has something to tell us actually.

Elisabeth Sweet 5:30
Yeah, we're gonna do that intermission, actually. So just hold off. There's a button below the screen. If you logged on to the campfire, the articles of unity.org URL, and there's a button that will activate at intermission. So just stay tuned.

Bret 5:43
All right. Sorry, I did not get the memo. I probably did get them at memo and I probably did not read the memo in time is what happened. But anyway, we will have you sign up at democracy AI at the intermission. But at the moment, I think the the pressing thing for us to do is to talk about where we are with respect to unity, what you all are seeing and what it means. So I'm having this experience, which I'm sure to some extent is being shared by both of you. Where there are a small number of people that are that really get it, they understand why unity is necessary, and they're on board. And as Elizabeth is seeing close up, there are literally hundreds of people working tremendous numbers of hours to make this happen. And then we get a lot of interest from people outside who seem to be waiting for some indication from the universe that it is time to actually activate. And I guess I'm struck by the question, if what they're seeing on their various news feeds is not triggering them to to go all in with Unity. What are they missing? Greg, do you have any idea?

Greg Ellis 7:07
Well, gosh, that's a really good question. I think part of the issue is that too many people today act as if no one can honestly disagree with them. If you have a difference of opinion with them, you're considered to not merely be an error, but in sin. You're a racist homophobe or whatever the villain of the day happens to be. And I've talked to you about this before but how do we few or maybe many? Who can who feel like we can see the inequities on both sides? I said recently, that it each each convention feels like there is this message of vote for us or die vote for us or you will be dead. This fear mongering and how do we spread this message more how can we talk and have the conversation that doesn't? That doesn't deny someone and and their existence or trigger someone out of existence and and listen to critical thinking. I'm perplexed. I mean, I have a few I have a few books that I have a lot of books but there's a few books here I want to just share they're very simple, small books. You know, the book of virtues Benjamin Franklin, the way to wealth Benjamin Franklin rules of civility and decent behavior, George Washington, common sense by Thomas Paine. We can learn a great deal from from the history of the past and the books that we read. And I think the word unity is we should dwell on that for a moment because reunification and unity the unity of what what what are we unifying for what are we coming around the campfire for? It is for that community collective it is to share stories, and to see if we can tend to the familial broken tapestries of this great country. I've talked with you before Brett, I love America. I mean, I'd think God Bless America in a heartbeat. And I will probably be vilifying people or castigated as some, you know, far right Republican, loving, crazy person. And we just live in very upside down tyranny the urgent times. And I'm I'm just pleased to be here. I'm pleased to be a part of the conversation and further the discourse as to how I can help how people out there can help and how we can all come together and and be more of a collective there is there is this restlessness I think in the midst of a bubble You know, with this motivation to get rich, which is more about the excitement of making money than it is about wealth. The desire, prosperity is become an ardent passion. And it's the awesome thems. It's the we're rival, we're left with Trump over Clinton where where Biden over Trump and everything so polarizing. And I'm really concerned about what Yeah, forgive me, Liz, I'm just really concerned about where we're at, with these two lesser evil choices.

Elisabeth Sweet 10:35
And to your point, I'm sorry for interrupting you, um, what's your point, I think that the labels are often what are preventing us from really finding the collective spirit. We, we put these boxes around ourselves and we aren't allowed and we aren't able to get out of them. And then we surround ourselves with people who also are comfortable with those boxes. And I think that a lot of what we're missing in American society is isn't tied to some sort of some sort of greater purpose and some sort of American mythology. Joseph Campbell is really has has impacted my life a lot. And his his stance on the need for a mythological like a some sort of mythology to really live by and to and to aspire to the hero's journey is just so important for that kind of ability to see other people in yourself and to and to break down the walls that that might have been put up around your that you are that you get comfortable in. So I agree with you, it's this, it's the sort of polarizing thing that we aren't able to really get through because we don't have a story anymore.

Greg Ellis 11:42
Yeah, reminds me of the fret of Forgive me brow, go ahead, I just very quickly reminds me the phrase roll lock. So when we get roll locked, and the loose definition of that would be when changed dramatically. When you break through beyond your pre existing belief system, maybe when you when you leave the work behind become more awake, but continue to be perceived as the same person by your family, and those closest to you or others in society. And I think we have to kind of lock this roll lock.

Bret 12:14
So I wish I had been taking notes because you both hit about six really important themes that I think really are exactly what's going on one of them the first one that you You nailed here, Greg was this idea that if someone does not agree with you, that they are the enemy, right? So I find this all the time, and it's very perplexing. I cannot understand what goes through people's minds, when they hear something that is different than their own perspective, and it automatically becomes of unknown type to them. It is, you know, I'm constantly facing being dismissed on the basis that if I'm not supporting Biden, for example, then that means I am supporting Trump, and that I am doing so out of some sort of defective character, right that this is this is this is about making money somehow, or I don't know what, but that that's such a small minded way of viewing things, and it blinds us to what I think is the irony of, of the present moment, at least on the left side is, there is a misunderstanding that if you love your country, that you don't see what's wrong with it, right. So it's as if people imagine that there's an inconsistency between between being a progressive and being a patriot. And I see no contradiction whatsoever, I want the country to live up to its immense promise. And that means both seeing what's wonderful about it, and seeing where it hasn't quite gotten there, or where it's fallen backwards. And so I wish people would just leave open a space for discovering that there's actually a perspective that isn't of some type they're familiar with, but that has some meaning that they should be, should be looking for. And of course, it's funny, when we settled on the idea of unity as a concept, you know, it immediately resonated for us for for very obvious reasons. But the number of other people who are thinking about the same thing and the number of places in history, you know, you point to these, these books that have a lot to tell us. And this concept is resonant for so many reasons at so many moments. So the final thing I'll say is I think that people are missing something very basic about it is much easier to see what the nation is not doing for you. Then see what it is doing for you. And so this desire to tear the place down is predicated on viewing only one of those two categories. If you think all it is doing for you is mistreating you, then the answer is well, you would lose nothing by tearing it down. But the problem is the stuff that works really well is more or less invisible, right? The the bad interaction with police is dramatic and, you know, spreads like wildfire, the normal interactions with police are uninteresting. And so I, I wish there were some mechanism there of course, many literary tropes about teleporting people into some alternate reality where they get to see what would happen if their wishes were fulfilled. I wish that the people who are so eager to tear the country down could see what the world would look like in its absence, and just have some that it would just give them some pause about what it is that they are inviting, because it's clearly a disaster, and we don't need to make it happen in order to discover that.

Elisabeth Sweet 16:05
And to that point, I would say that it's, it's much more of a reactive behavior than a responsive behavior, because if something offends you, or something triggers you then then you're immediately upset. And it's and it's really difficult to actually address the problem and to see through to the end of a logical conclusion. You know, you get sort of like, blind rage, or it just becomes very upsetting. And instead, I think that, that that moment to respond that breath is something that we've lost time for. I mean, the world is just such a busy place, how many notifications? Do you get on your phone a day? How many scrolls you do, do you do on your phone? You know, um, and there's, and there's just very little time to reflect and to and to respond to what's going on around you.

Greg Ellis 16:54
I wholeheartedly agree with that, that, you know, I've mentioned to Brett before the reason one of the themes of the respondent is how to be less reactive and more responsible, we are all response able, and it's no one person's fault. No one is to blame, we are all responsible, and how can we come together? to attend to this, I think, you know, to Brett's point about the being able to see into the future, if you will, or teleport into a time in place to be able to see where this is leading. Maybe that wound, you know that those wounds the wound is the place where the light enters you. And the scar is the heel where the darkness leaves. So perhaps there is it's a pre cursor to what, there may be some event horizon. You know, I think we, when I first became aware of the word woke, and when I started to see the the the, in a sense, we're living in this era of well, capitalism, in which companies pretend to care about pretend to care about social justice to sell products to people who pretend to hate capitalism. It just, and you just see, you see it everywhere you turn on the TV. I mean, I don't watch network television, I think I've seen network television news, maybe five or six times in the last five years, because it's sensational. It's fear based. Each side, whether it be Fox News, or CNN, whether it be the GOP or the DNC, it's this fear mongering, and, you know, I'm concerned about where we're at, in terms of mental health, particularly men's mental health, because I'm a man, and that's the lens I see through and particularly with COVID and the pandemic and the panic demmick of people this fear mongering, this fear based storytelling, that everything is well and everything is troubling, when actually I think some of it is I mean, what we're talking about comes from a concern and a curiosity of how we might tend and meaning I think there's a crisis of meaning and faith. You know, my understanding of meaning is well I do say everything happens for a reason we make up afterwards but it's, it's it's ascribe subjective and nature is objective reality and how we, how we can discern between what's a difficulty to enjoy and a problem to solve is important as well. And that reactivity that I see in mainstream media to your point, Elizabeth, is so amplified and has become and is rising and amplification that is becoming this tyrannical cacophonous den. When anytime a story hits, whether it be a police shoot Or whether it be a group of boys at a washington monument and squaring off or being squared off with that reactivity of, this is what happens. I want to be the first I want to get on anti social media, I want to show this, this is a lynching This is terrible. Jesse Smollett, this is a lynching This is terrible. This is this is a public, all of that rhetoric is so divisive. And if you take a beat, and you just well pay attention to what the body's trying to tell, you quell, the need to be reactive, and the impulse control, you can maybe be a bit more responsive when you do respond or responsible. And in time, you can see more context, the bigger picture, the biggest story of what's at play here within the media, with the ratings and the money and all of the and I'm just, I'm just so impressed with what what the articles of unity is, as been sets a set out to do on the journey, if you will, it's this big relationship of people who've come together, and and how impressive everyone is working towards a greater good for the Republic, if you want to build a ship, you don't drum up people to collect wood, and then not assign them tasks and work, but rather you teach them to long for the endless immensity of the sea. And America is so immense, and it's so vast, and it's so wonderful, that there is so much good and positive and great stories out there, I'd love to hear more of those, I'd love to see more of those on the news.

Bret 21:36
So in the spirit of campfire, I'm having a thought, a new thought, and I'm not sure it's the right thought. But in response to what you have both suggested people are missing, I'm seeing a picture in which they're really missing two things, there's a vision of what might be that I think the three of us and everybody else who is on board with Unity, would love to show people who are at the moment involved in this. I don't know whether to call it a slow motion train wreck, but it's also this, this faulty drama. It's a it's a false fight. And I think the other aspect of it is that the parties, all of the people who are involved in the fight, the one that you mentioned at the top, Greg, where when somebody says something that just doesn't fit with the script that you're on, then you know, they are the other thing and you fight them as if they were, you know, a pathogen or, or a predator or something like that. That that polarization is it is turning everyone into useful idiots. And if unity is something, it is a movement of people who are opting out of the useful idiot category. And you know, this is a difficult thing to do, because you will be portrayed as out of touch, or worse, you'll be portrayed as doing the bidding of the greater evil, as we've certainly talked about at length. And that's, of course, not at all what the movement is like on the inside, on the inside. It's decent people, and it's people who are highly diverse, and who roughly fair a sensor the country should go. It's not the same in any precise detail. But I have the sense that we cannot seem to escape the problem, that we are being demonized for a reason. And the reason is so that we can't be heard. And the reason that we mustn't be heard is that if we were here, trouble, it's so intuitive that you would want to be part of the Unity movement, that even for selfish reasons, that which one has to gain by being part of a movement that is resisting the nation being torn apart in this partisan battle is immense. So of course you would, as soon as you get it, you want to be on board with it. So it is very important that it be ungettable. And I guess there's just a there is a fight that you might be having with somebody. And then there is a fight that you're induced to have with somebody for their purpose and not yours and you and the people you're fighting with are actually not antagonists, but you are being placed in that role, because it is necessary for somebody else's well being. And I really wish there was some way unfortunately, I think that message will be all too easily understood by people who already get it. And because of the content, we know why people who don't get it are so hard to reach with it. So how do we escape that is there is there an out

Greg Ellis 25:02
Cars really good question How is there an hour? I don't know is the honest answer. I mean, there's doubt there isn't that, from my view, what I see is this, this polarization and, you know, mainstream and social media is so seems to be so ideologically fixated around identity politics that most public heterodox free thinkers that I see will be or have been excoriated, canceled, belittled on herded, is that a word? So how to break through how to, you know, it's almost like you, it feels like I've mentioned this to you before as well, Brad, the heretical Illuminati, you know, for me, I see people like you and many other people like you, as modern day philosophers confronting the this recent and it's and, you know, I talked with Heather McDonald recently, and I said reason, and she corrected me that it's been decades long in the academy, recent radicalization of left wing politics. And, you know, these eloquent emergent truths of this devotion to wisdom this how do we how do we position people whose voices we think should be amplified? And maybe they do have an air of irreducible rask ality and maybe they are out there? Great. Let's see, let's hear more voices. more moderate voice. I know it's an overused, what's wrong with being moderate? What's wrong with mediating through moderation, rather than polarizing through extremes? I don't know the answer. I'm curious as to how we might do more of it. That's why I'm here to just kind of lend my voice and see how I can help.

Elisabeth Sweet 27:12
I also do not know the answer. But I think I think part of part of the issue that I see, especially when I talk to people about unity, is that we're not ready, or it's not the time, and it's something that I've reflected on a lot. And I don't think that we're ever really ready for the things that are most important to our lives, and to the fulfillment of our lives in the most impactful things that either you do or happen to you, you're never ready for. But there are, you do have the skills and you have you have other other tools in your toolbox that can help you get there. And that can help you make it through that. And so I think a lot of the the readiness is or the, the lack of feeling ready is a is a fear at the end of the day. And so that's why fear mongering works so well, is because it preys on that lack of readiness, or on that lack of perceived on readiness. And it, you know, it has its way and and it doesn't let you feel capable, to do the things that you need to do, and to join, you know, to make a difference.

Bret 28:21
So I agree with these things. But I I feel like I'm watching a tragedy. And I don't mean I'm watching a tragedy unfold. I mean, I feel like I'm almost watching a scripted tragedy where I know what happens, what happens is people become motivated to do the thing that they must do, when it's too late. That's what's going to happen, right? People will get it, they will definitely get it, but they will get it when it's too late. And so at some level, how do you say, there's no such thing as not ready? Because what's coming is coming at a rate, right? There's a question about whether you will act and be able to alter what's coming or you won't act and then you will experience the downstream consequences of whatever it is. And people don't get the rate. The rate is incredibly fast. And I mean, you know, just even what we saw last night in Wisconsin, right? This is, you know, we're watching something that looks like a civil war. Now it's happening very locally, it's happening as a result of an event. But it does give us a hint of what's down the road if we don't figure out how to recognize each other. And so really, the point is it's there is no ready or not ready. You are equally ready for both outcomes. The question is which path Do you want to take it's a fork in the road and it to take the standard fork is to a Allow processes that you've now had a chance to see unfolding continue. And to take the other fork is to risk the unknown, definitely. But given what you know, is progressing, why wouldn't you risk the unknown? Right? It just it doesn't make sense that you would you know that you would head off the cliff, because you're afraid that if you take the road that doesn't head off the cliff, the answer might be worse. And the answer is it could be worse. But falling off a cliff is a terrible thing. Right? The chances that the other road actually goes somewhere is enough that you should take that risk, so you don't have the guaranteed falling off a cliff phenomenon.

Elisabeth Sweet 30:44
This, this reminds me of an old adage that my that my father used to say, when you come to a fork in the road, pick it up.

Bret 30:52
I believe that's, that's Yogi Berra, who I believe when you come to a fork in the road, take it was what he said, I think but anyway, yeah. Well, I mean, the other thing is, look, I think those of us on screen here, and those who have been on previous campfires, begin to tell another part of the story. Because I think we're facing the same disaster as everybody else. But I feel like we actually are doing okay. We don't have a, you know, other than the plan that we have deployed, we don't have some secret escape mechanism from a catastrophe where the nation comes apart. And that's scary. But I've got to tell you, I think there's something to the sense of stability that arises from just simply discovering that there are a lot of people who see the same picture, and that they are actually interested in doing something about it rather than just spectating the disaster. So I wish that one of the things people would grasp is, we may not be able to do anything about this, right? That's a fact. On the other hand, who do you want to be with? As this unfolds? Do you want to be with people who are actually interested in taking a risk and trying to do something new and different and averting a disaster? Or do you want to be on one of the teams that is causing the disaster? As you know, a group of useful idiots of one side or the other? Right it to me, it's just a slam dunk?

Greg Ellis 32:31
I agree, I think, I think planting your flag and saying this is this is where I stand this is I have, you know, this is my integrated sense of self. This is what I believe in. And I may not have the answers, I may not know where this is leading. But I I'll be damned if I'm gonna look back and say I never took a stand, that I'm I'm just choosing to go this route, because this is the lesser of two evils. I don't want orange man bad trumped arrangement syndrome. I have to go far left I Biden is is not cognitively there. And I'm not a fan of Harris. So I'm going to go right. Well, that's just left and right. Exactly. So and you're on one side or the other. And I think, you know, people have said to me, it's been tried before and the third party or the third ticket, I think we refer to it as so. And

Bret 33:29
they've also worked. It's not like third parties have never worked. I mean, I'm not saying this is a party. It isn't it could become one. But that's not what it is. It's a plan. But third parties have succeeded. And the thing is, it's also true that there are lots of patterns that you can find where something has no precedent, and then it happens and it does have a precedent. So given the unusual pneus of the moment, the fact that this doesn't sound like something you've seen work before, doesn't mean a damn thing.

Greg Ellis 34:00
Yeah, I agree. I agree. And I think you know, that there is a lot of fear that you know, I keep coming back to the fear. There's a lot of fear. I think there's a lot of fear mongering a lot. I think there's a lot of depression. I think many people are suffering right now everyone's everyone suffers with something, whatever that is, and many people living lives of quiet desperation. I see the suicide rates rising and divorce rates rising the resistance, and conversely at the same time, we're actually I think, you know, in terms of in general, we've I hesitate to say we've been living through peaceful times for the last but relatively speaking to the stories that I heard from my grandparents and parents growing up you know, we we've, I don't know there's this the sense i people have mentioned to me recently depression there's there's this almost like this depression of America's personality and that deep rest of depression is dis ease of America and the the How do we address our national unity? No. And that might be a touchdown for reversing common feelings of depression in the common collective and making people feel more positive and and moving away from, from the hateful to grateful. And I think this virtual space is moving businesses from grey to green from suburban Metropolis and urban environments to to the nature and wilderness and the countryside. So there's I think there are there are obviously positive things going on with all I've seen of the conventions, literally on both sides was a simple, simple message of vote for us, or die, they'll kill you, oh, they'll kill you, or you'll be dead. They didn't handle COVID, we would have handled it better. And it just goes, it's it just goes up and up and up. And what what, what good is that? And it's fueled by the mainstream media. It's what you buy. Now, go ahead. No, please go ahead.

Bret 36:23
I was just gonna say it's really unpatriotic. It's anti patriotic. And this is the thing that is hard to get that all of the flags involved, and all of the claims of patriotism are clearly hollow, because anybody who wishes to demonize another American right now are their American demons there are, but it's a small number, right? Most of the people who are doing the harm, misunderstand where they are. Right? They may be being misled by somebody who may themselves be confused, or may, in fact, be up to no good, but parties that want us at each other's throats, that want to use your hatred of other Americans as the reason that you should put them in power so that they can then sell that power, they can peddle it to the highest bidder, that is unpatriotic. And so somehow, it is impossible to make that point because these parties have branded patriotism, they've co opted the idea of patriotism. And so I think people have lost touch with what it actually looks like. Right? And that's what you know, that's what unity is about, and we must hang together, or surely we will all hang separately, right? We're not talking about a literal hanging in this case, but we are talking about the same phenomenon. And it's just If only there was a way to get people to just step out of their mindset long enough to listen with fresh ears, we'd have a much better shot

Elisabeth Sweet 38:09
so bright you said this earlier in the show that patriotism doesn't mean that you love America without any sort of qualms are that you just think it's perfect. And I know that we've we've talked a lot about the definition of patriot and patriotism. So Greg, I'd be really interested to know what what you think of patriotism. You think patriotism is beyond beyond just the nationalistic sort of confines that it's usually placed in.

Greg Ellis 38:38
By you know, I have an eye being an English of birth. I love my country of origin. I love being British, and I love the Englishness of the English. And I'm also American, I have American citizenship, and I love being American. I love being a part of I love being a patriot. For me, when I came to America, I was invited here to work and I had the distinct honor of being invited to sing the national anthem. At I think it was a New York Rangers game or hockey game and then an Oakland days game. I remember learning the national anthem, and I was very, I actually kept getting one word wrong. Every time I rehearsed it while I was rehearsing the Dave singer. I'm not gonna mention how I got the word wrong, but it was quite embarrassing. But I love that who's bright, I think it was Whose broad stripes and striped bra as I kept singing. And I think it's you know, America I love the sense of paid that sense of patriotism that rises for the national anthem. I love the the baseball game Americana hot dog family tradition of the seventh inning stretch. I love that sports bear That hurrah. We can win we can beat anyone aspect but I also love that that down home cooking of the South I love the different complex cultures and the rich breadth of history. Whether it be when I went to Birmingham Alabama to the Civil Rights Museum and the Baptist Church across the road and meeting the homeless people there and whether it be the great Native American Indian I don't even know we were allowed to say Native American Indian anymore. That's how the words I don't care, Choctaw, Cherokee, skiddy all all of that mythology and the code of, of the Indians. And there's just so the food that like it's so much about America that is to be championed and cheered. And the greatest I mean, was this, this little book here, I mean, even this little book, which, you know, it's called the Constitution of the United States. It's an amazing read, you know, the, that time, George Washington and what he brought together to put together that document, I marveled The first time I read that, that document, and how these men, people from a different era came together to set this great experiment. And I think America is a great experiment. It's a fresh, new, nimble, massive experiment that everyone's come together in, and it's a melting pot of so many rich, wonderful cultures and languages and, and religions and spiritualities and peoples. And I think, you know, I want to go back to it all the times it's may I'm maybe not answering your question, Liz. But we're in this position, because from my, my perspective, I keep talking about identity politics, or identity politics. I think we're in this position, because in its current form, it is a collective ideology, doesn't value the individual. And one of the things that I love about America is this, this notion of this concept of the American dream, you know, anyone can come to America and make it and particularly in Hollywood, you know, you can, you can be homeless one day, and then sell a script for a million dollars the next. And

Greg Ellis 42:42
identity politics doesn't value the, the individual for the content of his or her, they're more of a character, but instead makes prejudicial assessments on the basis of race and gender and sexuality and religion. In the name of anti racism, identity, politics, rehabilitated racial thinking, you know, I grew up in a small town in northern England, there was one family that had a darker skin tone than me, and it was the pigmentation. I didn't look upon Anthony wife, as you know, any identity. He was just my mate is just a friend they used to someone who, when I got out of line, he had been with me and we had a lot of fight one time and you know, it was was I think it was Anthony, but you know, this, this positioning of identitarian you are, who you are based on, on what I perceive or identify you as or how you it's, it's so it's so counterintuitive as well to me, because American is that place where you can, America is that place where you can come and you can your dreams can come true and nightmares too. And that's why I love this movement, this movement of unity, the articles of unity that says here, what we're actually we're not going to just rant from one side about the other, we're not just going to complain. And so it's been tried, and it's been, you know what we are going to try, we are going to come together and I know from look, Andrew Yang, who Brett, you know, I was a supporter of and still am a supporter of and I got behind his campaign. Did I realistically know that he had a realistic chance of winning? No, did I believe he would win? No, I'm honest, I didn't believe he would win, given the current system did I believe in Him, and was I willing to take take a stand for him and support him and speak for him and plant my flag and say, even though we may be defeated, this is who I stand with? Yes. And I'm willing to do that every single time now. And if I'm cancelled, if we're if it doesn't succeed, who defines what success is anyway.

Bret 44:57
So I want to address a couple points that you raise one. I think we're a little bit confused about the collectivist aspect of the, the woke movement, because there's nothing really wrong with collectivism right not there is a collective aspect. In fact, unity appeals to a certain collective desire. The problem is the D individuation. In other words, we have a collective nature, and we have an individual nature, and they're both very real, and they're both very important. And any movement that negates either one of these, you know, if you're so dyed in the wool libertarian, that all you see is the individual and you don't understand that there. You know, you believe the self, you're a self made person and the people you respect are all self made, well, then you're not understanding how we actually got where we are. So it's the tension between these two things that's important. And the D individuated. One is particularly frightening. You know, the most frightening movements in history have been predicated on a de individuation that turns people into cogs in a machine in a way that's extremely dangerous. The other thing I wanted to say is that, I think that this issue of you know, patriotism isn't just nationalism, I think you said, Elizabeth, I think there's actually a very clean distinction we can draw. And I don't know whether it is what he had on his mind. But I think JFK actually did this one very clearly. Ask not what your country can do for you ask what you can do for your country, and to me, what your country can do for you, you may love your country, because it does such wonderful things for you. And that's nationalism, and your willingness to sacrifice or to take risks on behalf of your country. That's patriotism. And I think that's where we are is at this moment, the country desperately needs us to take risks and to pay costs on its behalf so that it can continue. Why would we do that? Because so much depends on its continuing. I mean, in fact, it's not just Americans that are depending on it. It's the world, right? The role America plays in the world is vitally important, which doesn't mean that we always get it right. In fact, we have gotten it wrong many times, but the over arching impact has been very positive. And so many nations have followed us, right. The Constitution, which you mentioned, Greg, was a model for the free world and to undervalue what was accomplished here, and then to destroy it, because of what isn't right about it, either. What actually isn't right about it, or what is perceived to not be right about it. It's just such a gargantuan waste. I agree.

Elisabeth Sweet 47:56
I agree with you, too. And I think, though, about people who this country hasn't served, and so when I do get into arguments or discussions about patriotism, and, you know, loving America, and whatever way that is, um, it is hard to try to put myself in the shoes of people who have really not been served by this country at all and to, and to, and to appeal to them in a way that that really gets to them. Because I think that that's something really profound that needs to be addressed. And I don't know how to do it.

Bret 48:40
Well, I think the thing is, we do know how to do it, and we were on the path and I believe progress stalled, which is part of where the frustration is coming from, but the objective the right objective, was always equality of opportunity. Right? equality of opportunities, is a vital concept. It is the proper objective, it needs to be understood through properly sophisticated eyes. In other words, you're never going to have a system in which there's no nobody ever experienced this bad luck. But the bad luck has to be distributed randomly with respect to things like race and sex. So that objective was the right one. And unfortunately, it has now been supplanted by one that a will never work and B is going to create an absolute dystopia, right? equality of outcome is an insane objective that will take all sorts of human values and it will just bulldoze them and so, in some sense, I think when when when somebody challenges the demand for equality of outcome, they are heard to be desiring inequality. In a permanent sense, and somehow we have not managed to compel people that actually many of us, in fact, the great majority of Americans are committed to the idea that the right way for the country to be structured is to have opportunity as broadly distributed and as equally distributed as possible. Right? It's It's rare that I meet anybody who doesn't agree that that's the desirable state for the countries in

Greg Ellis 50:23
America. Isn't that what America? That's the what was the America I? I moved to 25 years ago? I mean, so do you think I'm curious to know from both of you, do you think that sometimes people talk about equality, and it's this declarative, definitive place where they actually took a moment to listen with curiosity, and had the discourse is I remember, I remember when I when I didn't fully understand, you know, the equity of outcome versus equity of opportunity when I had the first discourse about privilege and earn earned privilege and honor and privilege. And it wasn't color binded discussion and to understand just the ramifications, of equity of outcome that we want to live in Communist China. I mean, that's what that is, you know, I talked with them, Greg Hurwitz this week, on on an episode of the respondent. And we talk about equity of opportunity and equity of outcome. And we're gonna have an Olympics where everyone finishes the race at the same time where everyone gets the same column medal the same. Now, I mean, that's obviously a trite, bland example. But, you know, do you think either of you that some people just they just, it's rallying cry as the marching go, we want equality of everything?

Bret 51:53
Well, you know, it's funny, when the Evergreen situation was happening, I had this student who, you know, as the thing was unfolding feud, she had been there. In fact, she's in one of the videos, the first video that became famous from that, that whole incident, standing with me, this is a black woman. And anyway, as the whole thing was unfolding, she said, You know, there's this Kurt Vonnegut story, you have to read it. And I was, of course, not paying attention to things, I had to read it all. And she was very persistent. You have to read it. And finally, she persuaded me that there was something that I needed to read. And so I did the story is Harrison Bergeron. And it is basically just simply a thought experiment about equality of outcome and the absolute dystopia that it produces. Right? And she was absolutely right, that this was this was the core question. So I think the thing is, people are just they're not thinking and they detect that something is wrong, but they have understood what is wrong, incorrectly, and so that they are having kind of an allergic reaction against the, against a fiction. And unfortunately, they are credibly going to tear the country apart. And even if I think Unfortunately, the the woke side, is actually very likely to drive the country, into the arms of the other party, which is going to be dragged towards its worst impulses, by the fact that we are now going to see each other as racially defined. In other words, that was something that never went away. But it was going away over long periods of time. It's now back with such a vengeance. That, you know, people have been told that they are, they're demonic, because there's white, they're white, it's a kind of sin that they inherit, it can't be dispelled. And so they are going to begin to see themselves as white first to and, you know, it's not to say that there weren't people who saw it that way all along. But the question is, the mainstream is going to start seeing things in those terms. And it's dystopias, either way. Yeah, go ahead.

Elisabeth Sweet 54:36
Yeah. Greg, you're so your question also took me back to university. So not I didn't go to evergreen but I definitely my university was this is what we learn. We miss diagnose the problem and, and everyone got really upset about the wrong thing. It seems. Looking back and I mean, I personally subscribed to I'm very far left ideology for quite some time, I have some good friends who brought me back. Um, but it's, it's really difficult when everyone around you is, is yelling about something that you can see is a problem, but it's not the problem. And that's, I mean, that's what we did with Biden and Trump, right? Trump is the problem. He's, you know, when we get rid of Trump, the country's fixed, well, that's absolutely false. Um, but it works, because it's immediate, it's immediate gratification. And it's like, this is what you do. And then this is the outcome and ABC, but there are many more letters in the alphabet.

Bret 55:43
So Oh, go ahead, Greg.

Greg Ellis 55:46
No, no. I'm curious. You know, when we, when we talk about patriotism, you know, what you said, Brett, is that that really speaks to me in terms of this, the difference between patriotism and nationalism, and I'm not going to suggest what the difference is. But to me, patriotism is that combination of different feelings, relating to and when I say different, they can be, you know, aspirational, and advocation, or they can also be disappointed and, and let down in your country. But that, that, that that ethnic, cultural, political, historical, all of those, those myriad of areas that you can, you can, you know, you can speak up about and to and say, Look This, this, I have an issue with this, I have a real problem with this. And right now, I have a real problem with America. And it's this, and it's the both the political parties, that's the issue I have, and I'm going to speak out about it. Well, how am I going to speak about it, I'm going on here, I'm going to say, Now, some people may say he's got nothing to say, I'm not interested in it. So what you know, get involved have have a voice. I think there is there is something to, you know, someone once said, The world we perceive as a dream we learn to have from a script we have not written and, and perhaps that ideology is so extremely rooted. You know, to your point, Elizabeth, I have a friend of mine who's a CEO of a very successful company. And she was very radical and extreme and woke. And it was conversation and discourse over a long period of time that we conversed, and she began to come back from the extreme. And then so much so that she started to go towards the other extreme, and I'm like, be mindful, Coby. Also, he just did he doesn't have to go. The pendulum swings too big, though. All right.

Bret 57:53
I think I've got something. It's so obvious, really. But it feels right to me.

Greg Ellis 57:59
Yeah.

Bret 58:02
The question is, which of the you'll see what the the wrinkle is here in a second. But the feeling of patriotism that we are hunting around here is very close kin with the love that one has for their children. Right? You can be livid at your children, right? For something that they have done that is terribly wrong, it doesn't mean you don't love them, doesn't mean you wouldn't jump in front of a train to save them, right. But the point is that those things are completely consistent, right? You want your children to do well, you want them to shine, you want them to be the best people they possibly can be. And if they're being the best people they possibly can be, then you can be proud as hell. And if they're screwing up, you can be angry as hell. But the point is, these are their different axes, right? Your love for your country is not the same thing as your belief that it is doing everything right. And in fact, this is one of the things you know, it's, I find Trump one of the most difficult presidents in history to listen to, right? Because he's constantly telling us how everything we do is the best is if the fact that it's us doing it makes it the best, right? Which is a non sequitur at best. And, anyway, I just so the idea is there's something about the familial love that has the exact characteristic where your your love for your family does not change, because you're disappointed in them, right?

Greg Ellis 59:36
Yeah, I love that. I was I was, I was actually thinking that before about 1015 minutes ago about that notion that, you know, if you have a partner of you, I'm sure Heather at times has been very upset with you. It doesn't mean that she can't express you know, she still loves you. She's going to express her disappointment or upset and the Unity that's there, that that that that bond that love for each other. For the collective, you weinsteins Hastings Is it still remains it endures and, you know, critical thinking, how can we think critically? And I just love that relational ship that we're all on together. You know, we're all we're all in this together in little microcosms and how we how we can just you know what America gets on my nerves at times America just goes on and on and on and is Latin American just oh gosh you're so bright and loud and the fluorescent lights and everything's an extravaganza. Oh, you know I could go on and on about the things that at any given moment of the day if I'm having a hard time I could be grumpy about America or damn America. You're getting on my nerves. You know? Other times I love you America cologne now Oh, man it's not

Bret 1:01:06
Yeah, I totally agree with you at here's the tragedy though and I'm hesitant to even say this but the other day I was I was in some part of town I don't know very well and I was walking by a park and there was a black family a large black family like 20 people right I don't know if it's a reunion or what but and they were having a barbecue in the park and it looked so familiar and hospitable. And in any previous year, I would without hesitation have walked through the part of the park that they were in and I would have commented to them on the beauty of the day or how nice the party they were having looked and I know what would have come back because it never fails you know people they they like the camaraderie of a stranger recognizing them and it feels good every time and maybe there's even something a little bit extra when somebody is you know, from some different lineage and yet you're part of the same family and I looked at the situation and I just thought I don't know if that thing that never fails would fail now right? If are we at a place where because I'm going to walk into the situation and I'm white that there might be suspicion of me that's not my experience of the place and yet I know that that is if it's not true today, give it another six months, right? And I just felt that it was so much tragedy in even having to have that thought right I wouldn't have had the slightest hesitation in a past year. But we've come to a place where that sense of being in any way part of the same story on the same team whatever it is that causes strangers to be able to smile at each other and have a positive interaction and know that there was no subtext right that thing is being lost at an incredible rate and frankly I'm angry about it right we have a right to that

Greg Ellis 1:03:17
hmm how angry because we your anger expressed is not it's not as amplified as many people's anger around on the streets guy. I mean, you must be angry enough that you you've you've you've started a would you call it a movement Brett? I mean would you call

Bret 1:03:36
me out hopefully. I mean it's a small one I hope it becomes a large one I don't know that it needs me. But yeah, I think I triggered something or maybe I landed on something that was you know, ready to happen and so gave voice to it. But But yeah, I'm I am angry at anything that wants to tear us apart. And it doesn't mean that I think hey, we're great as we are I think we have a lot of work to do, but God dammit tearing this apart is just insane. It's not gonna be good for anybody.

Greg Ellis 1:04:10
Yeah, I've been I've mentioned this to you before, I've been astounded at some of the images I've seen in your being an artist and seeing statues works of art, even even if they're perceived to be agreed just pieces of art in a contextual historical time by a particular artist or to champion someone that people now look back on. That's the lessons of history they're there. You know, I when I saw in my own country, Winston Churchill statue being defaced and people urinating on it and tried to tear it down. This is a man who could be argued I know it's his, his history has been rewritten in the last few years. Apparently, that he's single handedly or at least lead that he was the voice of England during the Second World War, and really was that leader that stepped in love him and he had his issues and he and like have like most men or men, that he helped save the nation and help bring together the the Allied forces to help defeat true Nazis and not the neo nazis we refer to today as the alt right, and the you know, anyone who isn't radical left, so I've been more perplexed than angry. But there have been times when I've been angry.

Elisabeth Sweet 1:05:36
What's so surprising about those events? And when that happens is why are we Why are we taking down Churchill instead of diving deeper into who else was there that made that happen? Because you know, it wasn't just that one man, he had a whole team of people, there are so many people doing so many other things that allowed for that to happen. Let's tell more stories instead of taking down one and then silencing the others?

Bret 1:06:00
Well, I would say I would say it a little differently. I would say that the the key thing is, warts and all right. Like, let me confess, I have a problem with the celebration of Christopher Columbus, this one gets me, I don't, I don't resonate with it. And let me tell you why. The fact of Christopher Columbus is an absolute catastrophe for American Indians. Right? Now, that doesn't all belong on Christopher Columbus's plate. But some of it does. And the fact that we would celebrate Christopher Columbus as if he discovered America, you can't discover a continent with hundreds or 50 million people on it, or something like that, right? So a there's a fiction in the story, which is that he discovered it, what it really means is he discovered it on behalf of Europeans was, which was a catastrophe for another population of people who are now Americans. So I don't, I don't like us celebrating something that was a disaster for one of our member populations. The other thing is, it's a nonsense myth. That wasn't his name. He wasn't Christopher Columbus, he was christobel cologne. So the fact that we're writing a myth for the perspective of, I don't know conveying it to children or something, it's all kind of nonsensical, that said, we ought to be teaching what crystal ball cologne did and didn't do and how he ended up doing it. It's a simple factual story. And the fact that that factual story has an important relevance to what America is, is something that's unchangeable, it just simply did happen. And it changed history. And so you know, in the case of Churchill, there's good and bad, but the good, changed history, for the better, it was important, right? You will find the same thing is true for Martin Luther King, Jr. Right? If you want to find only the warts, he had them, but did he change history? for the better? Yes, did he Frankly, I think willingly give his life in order to make this a better country. I believe he did. And so you know, I'm comfortable with a warts and all, discussion of anybody including me, right? I don't want to be mythologized. I want to be dealt with, with my flaws and my strengths together. That's the that's the only picture that makes sense. It's the only one you would want to teach because it's the only one that gives anybody any basis to know what to do with the information. Right? So I think the thing is, is history a matter of self serving myths? Or is history a description of what happened that has nuance and complexity that you have to grapple with? It has to be the second, right, the former, if we treat it as a mythological space that we are allowed to paint in a way that reflects well on us and badly on others, then it just ends in a war of all against all which is where I'm afraid we're headed.

Elisabeth Sweet 1:09:17
on what's interesting about mythology is in Greek and Roman times is that it is good and bad. And a lot of it's really gnarly. And it's not just people who are who are doing the best in the world. And I don't know they're like doing all these great things. It's like really crazy stories of people sacrificing a lot and failing epically. And then maybe redeeming themselves. Maybe not, but that's what we learn from we learn from the mistakes and we can't be perfect.

Bret 1:09:46
No one can be Yeah, nope, nobody can be nobody is, you know, Churchill, Martin Luther King Gandhi. They're human beings are flawed and there are tensions within every single human beings. Let's I don't know, stop mythologizing, I guess. All right, Greg, did you have something you wanted to say?

Greg Ellis 1:10:07
I was just gonna mention I, you know, I wholeheartedly agree with you about Chris Christopher Columbus. You know, in Hollywood, we have Chris Columbus, who's a film director and producer and screenwriter. Some may know him for directing Mrs. Doubtfire and some of the Harry Potter movies at home alone. And I didn't know about the history of Christopher Columbus, or more of that rich history of Christopher Columbus. And that's, I think one of the lessons is that we're always we're always, we should always try and strive to be open to learning something new. And if I learned that from you, for example, Bretton said, You know, I still I disagree with you, I still want to celebrate Christopher Columbus and have a day named after you have every right to do get educated first, a little bit on the history. And the you know, what actually happened, who this man was, how we remember him, why we remember him the way we remember him, you know, and how we might rewrite some of that history?

Bret 1:11:14
Well, I want to, I want to push back a little bit, because I agree that you should have the right to celebrate what you would. But I believe that at the same time, just as you have the right to say anything, there are certain things you should you should decide not to say because it does harm, right? So I guess what I would, what I would get at is, there are if I celebrate Christopher Columbus, or if I improve it, and I celebrate crystal ball Cologne, I'm celebrating a tragedy for some Americans, I don't think I should be celebrating anything that was a tragedy for some Americans, which means, you know, I don't, I don't want the Confederacy celebrated. I certainly want it understood, it doesn't mean that there weren't, you know, people who were patriotic to it, who had laudable characteristics. But I don't want it celebrated because the Confederacy was a catastrophe for a population of Americans. And maybe this is just part of what unity is about is about the recognition that we're not going to. We're not going to pretend anything didn't happen. Right. But the thing is we celebrate should be things that we can all celebrate. Right? And I'm not saying that that's the correct resolution, but it feels, it feels right to me. And, you know, I mean, I think in some sense, this is built into the fabric of this country. Why do I celebrate Benjamin Franklin is not my ancestor couldn't possibly be right. But he is my cultural ancestor. Right? What Benjamin Franklin represents is something that has descended through history to me, and something that is laudable and something that I believe should be universal, we should all feel Ben Franklin doesn't matter, your skin color doesn't matter. You know, what your faith might be. Ben Franklin was a great thinker, and he was a great American thinker. And we Americans are, in some sense, descended from him irrespective of when we arrived, and by what mechanism. And so I don't know, I want I want a vision of unity in which we bring everyone in on the good stuff that can truly be celebrated by us all. And we're all of us recognize the horrors of those features of our history that, you know, we're a win for some and a loss for others.

Elisabeth Sweet 1:13:49
And, on that note, Brett, I think that's a perfect segue into bringing the audience to the conversation. And so after intermission, we're gonna use democracy AI. And we, we can ask you the audience some questions, and one that I asked or will ask, is, what? What can we celebrate about America? And what is worth celebrating now? So Greg, Brent, if you have some questions on your mind right now that you'd like to ask the audience, we can also talk about it in remission, and then we can announce it after. That'd be great.

Bret 1:14:23
I'd like to ask people if they have talked to friends and family about unity and what has been if they can characterize the response that has come back, I'd be very curious to know what happens when people have tried that. Greg, do you have anything you'd like to ask me? I'd

Greg Ellis 1:14:44
be curious to hear the answers to that too. I i would i would ask what what drove people to connect with Unity? How did people connect with Unity was it was it the message was it was it The was it bread? Was it the voice? Was it a particular podcast was in an episode what connected? How did people become connected to this? Because I think this movement, this amplification of this movement is really is really something. It's really impressive what everyone has been able to put together. I'm just so I don't know if there's two people or 2000 people or how many people are out there. I'm just impressed that this is happening this time in American history.

Bret 1:15:38
All right. So we are going to take an intermission, you if you have not done it already should click the button at the bottom of the screen. Is that right? Elizabeth? is a that is currently a button at the bottom of the screen that will connect you with democracy AI, and when we return after today, a 15 minute break. Is that right? Elizabeth? Elizabeth knows right?

Elisabeth Sweet 1:16:00
Yes. 15 minute intermission.

Bret 1:16:03
15 minute intermission. All right, and then we will sort out some of what we learn and hopefully it will generate some more questions. And in the meantime,

Bret 1:16:14
be well and we'll see in 15 Hey folks, welcome back to our fifth unity 2020 campfire with Greg Ellis and Elizabeth sweet. We are at the interactive q&a portion where we are going to use this amazing tool that has been provided to us to interact with you the audience and find out what you are experiencing what you know what you desire, all of those things. So, Elizabeth, I think I'm going to hand it over to you as you have the the console that interacts with democracy AI, what do you see?

Elisabeth Sweet 1:33:55
You do indeed. So um, we asked the audience to ask us a question first, while they warmed up and answer the questions that we asked or yet to answer the questions that we asked before the intermission. So the question that had the highest percentage agreement from our audiences in democracy AI is an interesting one. Um, what key campaign finance and voting process reforms? I'm not I'm not sure I understand this, not first past the post are essential to save our democracy. Can you shed any light on that one?

Bret 1:34:32
Yeah, they're asking for what kinds of structural alterations we would want in order to fix the democratic process so that it is less prone to capture and to polarization, things like that. And so I'm a little hesitant to be specific here. And I would just point to the fact that the Unity 2020 proposal itself, demo straits, that there is a way within the confines of our existing structure to do something that functions differently. The fact of creating a an agreement, a power sharing agreement under which our candidates will be drafted, that demonstrates that you don't actually need to alter the structure and structure of the Constitution in order to change the way it functions. So how many such alterations are there that one can envision where one doesn't have to take a scalpel to the structuring of the the rules of the nation in order to to alter where we end up? I don't know how clear that is. But my point is, I don't want us to limit ourselves to thinking that what has to happen here is some kind of constitutional convention or its equivalent in order to fix how things work. Sometimes a little imagination is what it takes.

Elisabeth Sweet 1:36:06
Thanks. The next question that we have is I think we should move up sorry, I'm sorry, I think we should move. I think we should move this movement off the internet. How do we engage locally, should we start crowdfunding?

Bret 1:36:23
Those seem to be two very different questions. The movement can't move off the internet, it can begin to do things that are not on the internet. And I very much hope that will happen. Obviously, COVID makes that really difficult. Because gathering in person is obviously something that carries a certain amount of peril. Hopefully that clears up soon don't know when it will. In the meantime, we may be stuck with various kinds of internet phenomena. I'm not sure why the funding question is linked to that. All I can say about the funding is that there is a world of possibilities that is opened up by substantial funding. And then there are great many regulations and hazards that accompany having the funding and that one should not plunge into it without looking first at the sum total of phenomena that you'll engage with if you do so. But anyway, yes. engage with people directly it doesn't it this is not supposed to be a top down. movement. This is you know, campfire is chosen as a metaphor because people gather around campfires, and you should take embers from our campfire and start your own and gather people and help them see what you can see and figure out what they have to teach you

Greg Ellis 1:37:46
and sing songs of unity. Are we supposed to sing around a campfire we are after a few tardies, right?

Bret 1:37:54
Well, that's another thing that week, I wondered whether or not it would set the right or the wrong tone. If we were to share drinks around a campfire probably it would be an appropriate thing to do and we should consider it for future campfires. But yeah, songs definitely.

Greg Ellis 1:38:09
Yeah, maybe maybe we just don't don't drink the Kool Aid. In terms of in terms of, for me campaign finance reform, that's a huge thing. I think the system has a real conflict of interest right now real in perceived results when members seek and receive campaign contributions. One of my particular areas of agitation or advocation is in marriage and family break down when I found out that the default shared parenting law which has been introduced in Minnesota and Arizona and Kentucky, to reform family law had only been passed in Kentucky and the reason it was passed was because in Kentucky, the state legislature cannot be lobbied by law firms and attorneys and Family Law practices. I think, personally, I think the breakdown of the family is the single single biggest civilizational catastrophe we might be facing today. And perhaps the greatest indicator, the root of America's torn familial test tapestry is marriage and family breakdown social ills and public policy stem from the health and well being of relationships and family formation. And that personality of America which seems to be disordered, somewhat, is it's rooted in that, that lack of cross partisan relational ships and relationships and how people talk and discourse across the aisle. So I think taking some of the money out of family of promoting family breakdown would be huge. And I think obviously the pharmaceutical industry there are so many industries and campaign finance reform from is a big one.

Bret 1:40:01
Well, so campaign finance reform has long been a signature issue for me. But I almost wonder if we It is important, but insufficient at this point. There's a earlier moment in our history where campaign finance reform might have been sufficient to to write the ship of state. But I think that time has passed. But I would point out that this is actually a good example of something that could be dealt with by structural reform, one that is actually hard to imagine, because there's so much money in our political system. But it could also be dealt with in some other way that doesn't involve the formality, which is to say, people could stop electing politicians to take money from corrupting influences. And this is something you do not require anyone's permission to do. And we have, in fact seen politicians who have pledged to raise only money below a certain dollar amount, for example. So there are many ways to to get there, the necessity of taking money out of politics is absolutely clear, I would say it is a corrosive influence. And the frustration in the streets is very much a consequence of the fact that policy is now almost completely decoupled with the the public will and the public well being of the public has very little influence over policy and it has left it has left people angry and legitimately so but they've they have lashed out in a way that is largely incoherent.

Greg Ellis 1:41:41
Do you think there? Go ahead, Elizabeth.

Elisabeth Sweet 1:41:46
Oh, I just wanted to add to the, to the to the family metaphor that we were actually talking about in the first half. We talked about children and relate relationships to children and relationships to spouses, but we didn't touch on the relationship to parents. And I think that's something that's really lost as well is this is the sort of breakdown of parental trust. And I think that that is something that we are living through right now is this sort of this, that this hatred of, of the system and of history and of the past, and I think that I don't know, this is getting way metaphorical and theoretical, and you guys were just bringing you back down to earth. So we don't have to go down this route. But I agree with you, Greg. I

Greg Ellis 1:42:31
know, hatred of the patriarchy. Don't get me started on that.

Elisabeth Sweet 1:42:37
So that Yeah, I just I just I just wanted to raise that point. But you were saying I'm sorry.

Bret 1:42:41
No. Well, I Greg was gonna say something I just wanted to point out that there is something well, below the level of governance, there's something corrosive about advertisers seeking to induce desires in young people because it gets them to spend money, that this is actually interfering with the natural parental relationship. And I don't know what the outgrowth of that is, but one of the things that may be emerging, as you point out, Elizabeth is a distrust of the past may have something to do with the fact that there's been a force for its own economic reasons interfering with the relationship that one generation has with another. And it I don't know what relevance it has to our movement and our political objectives, but But certainly, it's something that needs to be thought of in the larger context.

Greg Ellis 1:43:41
Yeah, I think it's a really good point that you make Elizabeth one of my areas of passion is on the respondent is families and the familial bonds and how they seem we seem to be tearing down and breaking down the family and and you know, Brett and I talked about on the Dark Horse podcast we talked about boys in particular, and you know, the moat motivational factors driving the growing epidemic of unmotivated boys, video games and teaching methods prescription drugs, environmental toxins devaluation of masculinity, that's the big one for me. Why are we Why have we been a Why have we allowed the conversation in social and mainstream media to devalue the the image of man and the patriarch and the father figure, and if we, if we don't speak up and speak out about that, then we are devaluing all of our families, the collective tribe, individual and collective. So I'm fascinated with that particular area and how we can come together around the campfire. We can break bread we can get to know our fellow man, woman, child. My father, from different cultural backgrounds, different a different ethnicities. Recently on respondent I brought I brought extra words considered to be extreme member of an Tifa and the proud boys, to bring them together to have a conversation, we need to bring the extremes in from the cold and have those conversations so that people feel less out there. You know. And, and I think that, that boys and men and fathers and daughters and mothers, how we can begin to, really, for me, the policy change, I understand what you're saying, but it's extremely difficult, because people do feel disenfranchised, from policy and from with the big money in politics and changing policy. But when I when I see the legal system, not reforming itself, because it's incentivized to make money from the breakdown of families. That's a huge issue. For me, that's a catastrophe that we need to attend to. Because our future generations I grew up growing up without leadership and guidance and mentorship and role models.

Bret 1:46:16
I agree, I think family is essential, and it's under attack from multiple sides, one of them being the one, you point to another one being the explicitly anti familial message in the BLM movement. And what I would say, though, is that we are overdue for a kind of sober renegotiation of the agreement between the sexes, for example, that there is something about the way history has unfolded, that has placed different burdens on men and on women. And there is room for a new and more modern take, which is not to say that one throws out all of the things from the past, because some of those things, frankly, aren't even about what it is to be human. We inherited them from an even more ancient past. But But what I want us to see is preserved, the stuff that works, the stuff that is out of date may need an update. And what we should do is we should seek the the renegotiation that retrieves the best gains for all involved at the lowest cost. And it's about time we had that conversation, which we can't in the context of motivated reasoning about familial destruction or anything like it.

Elisabeth Sweet 1:47:51
And it's interesting, one of our, one of our audience members echoed or said, or, excuse me, articulated almost exactly what we're talking about here in response to the question, what drove you to connect with you to be 2020? Which I believe Greg was your question. This person said, I'm afraid of Trump and Biden and I see the collapse of civilization right around the corner, and no one seems to see it or care. And this is the part that really speaks to what we were just talking about. Almost every aspect of our culture has become disgusted and depraved due to our market culture. And so it's this overprint it's this prioritization of the market over people over families.

Greg Ellis 1:48:32
Yeah, that's a really good point. I think it's no way hyperbolic to say that American society in the Western world as a whole is in the grips and has been in the grips of a cultural war. And the society the seismic societal rumblings under our feet have been knocking us off balance for quite some time, and we need to re center ourselves and get a firmer footing. And it seems it seems to me that no matter the issues surrounding rhetoric and debate as had the shrill, panic based tenor, talk about the panic dynamic and overwrought intensity that's an unprecedented whether it's me to Trump racism, mass violence, immigration, or so many other issues and concerns. And there's this growing chasm between opposing sides and it's just grown wider and wider and wider. And and this this to me articles of unity is daring. You know, it really is very daring and we need some derring do in America America is known for derring do for people who take risks and that that daring to express an opinion that conflicts with a given prevailing orthodoxy all we might be subject to ridicule and personal invective. So let's have the debate you know, you know, it's it's It's true that most vicious skirmish skirmishes involve these these soldiers from the frontlines who are battle with battle tested social justice warriors, and everyone's fighting for that that piece of the commodity commoditized, communicative media pie. So how do we how do we break through? Well, that derring do is the articles of unity. It's here it's not, it's not a pipe dream. It's happening. someone tweeted, tweeted me the other day. Well, that you're like Andrew Yang, for free. Andrew Yang. Well, that ship sailed and that ship sailed and will no way it hasn't. It's sailing, and we're all on it. We're all on this beautiful expanded to America. So get on board and see like, you know, get involved.

Bret 1:50:53
I totally agree with this. People have so many rationalizations for why they don't want to do something different. And, boy, if there was ever a time to get over it now would be it. So Elizabeth, Oh, go ahead.

Elisabeth Sweet 1:51:10
Yeah, I just have one more one more response from one of our audience members that 76% of the rest of the audience agree with and it speaks to this perfectly. I agree with you. I agree with the assessment that this country is in peril. I haven't previously been politically active. But I feel that this year has given me no choice. I feel it's my duty to rally to a cause that could return us to the path of progress.

Bret 1:51:32
Hell, yeah. Hell yeah. No. Oh, hell, yeah. Every word. I mean, that's it, we are in peril. And we are left with no choice. And if all the people who are telling you that we are making the wrong choice, they have not yet understood that they don't have a choice but to do something different that as you point out, Greg, involves parallel. But so what? That's where we asked,

Greg Ellis 1:51:58
yeah, I wholeheartedly agree this, sometimes I am astounded that people don't see that there is no choice. It's already been like, you and I talked about it months, months ago, I saw but we were not choosing the DNC is made the choice. They were not making the choice. They made the choice. And months ago, yep. Okay, it's gonna be Joe, and it's gonna be comma, and we know what the choice is on the other side. So we don't have a choice that this is a choice and have a voice, you have a choice. And it's a unity.

Bret 1:52:36
I mean, I do wonder why the parties get a pass with respect to their responsibility. I mean, you know, there's no shortage of people who will come at any effort to do anything new, and accuse it of inviting danger or, you know, being implausible or being about something else. But the party's announced to us that they are ready to roll the dice on the future of this country. They're not worried. If they were worried they'd sober up but they're not sober. They're, you know, they're having a hoot. So it just seems to me at the point that your party's announce that they have no interest in leadership, that they don't really care about risking a an empty for years when we can least, least tolerate it, then they do leave us no choice. So they acted as you point out, Greg, and we are responding because that's what one would do rationally.

Unknown 1:53:40
We are there was

Bret 1:53:42
I guess so.

Elisabeth Sweet 1:53:44
Speaking of rationality, in response to the question, what about unity resonates most with you are most agreed with answer with 74% of audience agreement has two points. Number one, the promotion of more rational, less emotional thought. And number two, focus on bringing the heat down and letting the light take over.

Bret 1:54:08
Yep. Excellent. Right, bringing the heat down. Even in this this is so much that you can't have a conversation because you get there. It's like instantly the judgment about what you represent and what the right answer to it is everybody so damn sure of themselves. So yeah, that's a very good answer. You said 77%. agree with it.

Elisabeth Sweet 1:54:28
74%. And then the next most agreed with the answer was respecting other opinions and finding a common unified way to work together despite differences. Absolutely, yeah. Yeah.

Greg Ellis 1:54:42
We're so much stronger together than we are separate into different areas come to they take the blinkers off. See what's going on. See what's been going on for so long and why up, wake up the woke, and just just listen with curiosity to what's going on. That's all just I, I agree wholeheartedly with what what, you know, people are saying and the responses and it's what it's wonderful to have. It's wonderful to be a part of this and to be part of the discourse. So thank you for having me.

Bret 1:55:21
Thanks for doing this. I would say listen with curiosity, you said and I would add generosity. If you will assume if don't don't assume the worst of what is being said the worst possible interpretation is see if there's not something in what people are saying that you resonate with, and then have the courage to say, I agree with you this far. Here's where I think we disagree. You'll be amazed how far that formulation will take you. Hmm, I love that, assuming you're having a real conversation and not one in which somebody has decided you're a villain and they're going to defeat you. Because that's the only way the universe continues

Greg Ellis 1:56:01
which you are a nasty villain, and we must cancel you in the moment, I will not hear a word of what you're saying. I will put my moustache. And I shall go away and plot your demise.

Bret 1:56:14
Exactly. It doesn't usually come perfect phrase that way. But But yeah, that's approximately the tenor of it. What else? Do you have Elizabeth, you see other answers you'd like to tell us about?

Elisabeth Sweet 1:56:27
Um, yeah, I've just I've moved on to the next question. What do you want to celebrate about America? And there's, there are a bunch of answers that are tied, actually. 75%. And the first one that pops up is our ability to bring cultures and people together and evolve culturally from them. America's ability to adapt and self reflect and improve as a means of celebration. And I think that's, I think that's beautiful. Um, you know, it's about integration. Not and yeah, it's about bringing people together and and having you know, bulgogi tacos is like, such a such a fun thing to think about it like you, you you have Korean food, and you mix it with Mexican food, and you have this really kind of strange thing, but it's delicious. And it's fun. And you it's, it's about bringing people together really? Yeah, I think culturally together,

Bret 1:57:24
I think there's something very deep about this. And I'm a little embarrassed, it took me so long to even realize what it was, you know, I've been an American for my whole life, which is 51 years. And I've been studying human evolution and in particular patterns of human history and prehistory. And I know that people battle on the basis of lineage identity, that's one of the things that human beings do. And the thing that's really special about the country is that it aspires to do something different. It aspires to collaborate on the basis of the fact that it is profitable for us to collaborate, even when we are not close relatives of each other. And this is the tragedy of what's happening is we are actually losing that. And we are defaulting to an ancient mode that is detestable, a mode in which we fight people because of something they had no choice about, right? Who they who they are at the level of their immutable characteristics. It's such a stupid thing to fight over that that's your genes in charge. And if there's one thing I've learned from studying evolution, you don't want your genes to be in charge, what they want, is arbitrary, a lot of it's immoral, and the fact that America aspires to something better, and that the free world followed us because what it aspired to was so beautiful and so desirable that it was irresistible. How can we lose the courage of our convictions now it's just a terrible error.

Greg Ellis 1:58:58
Yeah, and I would I echo that turn the lens on on with some of the celebrated aspects of what brought us to where we are today. how we've survived and move from survival to thrival and celebrate the celebrity of America you know, there is so much good going on in America so many good people. That that connective tissue, that cathartic sensorium of all these different ethnicities and cultures and the fact that I'm allowed in I mean, I you know, it wasn't too long ago there was a tea party in Boston apparently. And we're all we're all we're all ragtag and from somewhere else, and from you have to go far back enough that this is the beauty of the campfire. You know, the next one we'll have to have some some virtual s'mores and I'm gonna get you singing Bret wise. Oh, absolutely.

Bret 1:59:56
I love saying I should say it is a beautiful thing. The fly in the ointment of this campfire is the word thrival, which I absolutely categorically reject,

Greg Ellis 2:00:07
I think a song called survival to thrive. rival, let's reject the word because Brett rejected.

Bret 2:00:19
I will not go along with thrival. But everything else you said I resonate with.

Greg Ellis 2:00:25
Love is just the one word it was that

Bret 2:00:27
one word, I'm not going to be able to get past it. I think you know, that may be a personal defect, I would accept that interpretation. But nonetheless, I'm not going to budge.

Greg Ellis 2:00:35
Well, I've come out with a few different aphorisms. Change is painful and pain, pain is changeable. is changeable a word does that pass out that one? That one

Bret 2:00:44
works for me, you know, well enough. well enough. All right, Elizabeth, what do you have for us?

Elisabeth Sweet 2:00:52
Yeah, I've got I've got another really good one. So let me remind us of the question, what do you want to celebrate about America? This person says, liberty, I want gay couples to protect their marijuana with ar 15. If that makes them happy.

Bret 2:01:05
It's powerful. Ar fifteens are powerful, as is marijuana now that we've concentrated, I'm

Greg Ellis 2:01:13
getting high, or I'll shoot?

Bret 2:01:17
Yeah. Yeah, that's Look, I don't want them to have to defend it with ar 15. But otherwise, I'm on board with that view. Shouldn't have to?

Elisabeth Sweet 2:01:31
Oh, um, and we can we can close this question with this answer, that we don't come from the same place literally or metaphorically, but we agreed to work together to be in a place worth living in and dying for.

Bret 2:01:45
Yeah, I love this. You know, a couple of years ago, like, literally maybe two years ago, I said something about patriotism on Twitter. And I got this pushback, that there was disbelief that there was any patriotism on the left. And I know what it was about, because I see a lot of tearing down of America and minimizing its accomplishments and things like that on the left. But I also come from a tradition that is patriotic and does want to see the country live up to its potential. And I feel like, I don't know, hopefully, the Unity movement has had something to do with it. But I hear people wrestling with their own subconscious and discovering that they actually are comfortable with this, this patriotic, collective view of what we are as a nation and what we might be. And, you know, I hope we accomplish more, I hope we find a way to recap for the White House. But whether we do that, or not seeing people find each other and look each other in the eye on the basis of this shared understanding of what we are, is very heartening. So I'm enthusiastic about about the fact that you can even hear that in the responses to these questions very clearly, I think.

Greg Ellis 2:03:25
Yeah, it's, go ahead.

Elisabeth Sweet 2:03:29
Oh, um, I'm just gonna move on to the next question that I think Brent asked, What do friends and family say when you talk to them about unity? And unfortunately, it's a little less positive than we might have hoped. But the top answer was that most people say it won't work, I've been able to get through a few and they joined the movement. So people are also looking at this, like a movement, which I think is good for, you know, sort of the long term vision of what of what we deserve as Americans. Now there's, there's there's a lot of skepticism that I'm seeing here in the answers, they don't feel safe with the idea. And, yeah, a lot of it won't work. And I think that this speaks to sort of the frames and mental models that we that we create, and that are and that we live in. It's really hard to to walk outside of those and to imagine something that's never happened before that we've never seen. But I think it's possible. I mean, it has to be possible, right?

Bret 2:04:34
Well, the other thing to say is the self fulfilling aspect of saying that it's not possible is a little bit hard to get past if you're in the movement, because it absolutely is possible. It may not happen. Why won't it to happen? Because people have told themselves that it's not possible. Why do they tell themselves that it's not possible, in part because the parties have made this very difficult and they have assured you that anybody Who would think about possibilities like this is either stupid or a traitor? Right? You're electing the greater evil, or you're just too dumb to get why it won't work. And the fact is, it either will work or something else will eventually work, or we will die from it not working. Right, we will tear ourselves apart. Because people lack imagination to see another possibility when the other possibility. I mean, this isn't like somebody is asking you to literally go charge a hill with a machine gun nest on it. This is a question of being willing to confront parties and tell them no and vote. Right? That's very simple, and it's comparatively safe. But the parties have done a very effective job of convincing people that there is no other way.

Elisabeth Sweet 2:05:58
And to that point, um, the the top the sort of fourth most popular answer was, most are receptive, but doubt it's practicality, the politically disaffected are the most receptive. And I just want you all to know out there that over half of the people participating are politically disaffected, as they highlighted in the onboarding question. So we're, we're here, I mean, we are receptive like this is this is a home for you, if you are politically disaffected, or you feel like you don't belong on either at the side of the aisle, you, you belong here, you belong in unity.

Bret 2:06:35
So this is such an important point, the parties have played a cynical game, because they don't care whether most Americans vote for them, what they need is enough Americans to vote for them that they have power that they can then sell to the highest bidder, that can be a tiny fraction of Americans. So they have played a very toxic game, because it doesn't matter to them, that they have turned off most Americans to the questions of governance, the fact that unity seems to bring so many people back into the question of how are we to live is very heartening. And we're unity to capture the attention of simply that group of people that disaffected it would be the largest movement in the country. And so maybe this is really what the parties are telling us is that those who are partisans, are going to be unreachable because they're robots. They've been programmed not to be reachable. That's their mechanism for never having to deal with real competition. But that there, the fatal error is that they have turned so many people off, that if those people can be alerted to the fact that there is something that can be done, then in the end, we will win.

Greg Ellis 2:08:02
I think we've already won. There's more winning to be had. I mean, part of the I get the goal and the purpose, the endgame. But I also think that that, you know, maybe there are disaffected people who have found the articles of unity, but I also think there are people who, who will begin to find the articles of unity that are in either one of the two camps that will just be drawn to a conversation that isn't so toxic that isn't so shame, rage. cyclical, it isn't human kryptonite have its us or them, and if you're with me or not with us, then you're with them. And there's got to be multiple hidden bonuses and positives to to a conversation that is inclusive, rather than exclusive. asthma. Oh, absolutely.

Bret 2:08:56
I mean, and in fact, many of the dissident disaffected reside inside the parties. I was one I still am one. I'm a registered Democrat. And I've described myself for a decade as the world's most reluctant Democrat. Why? Because I see the game. Why don't I leave the party because I want to vote for Andrew Yang and Tulsi gathered in the hope that they can eventually outfox the DNC, but do I expect it to happen inside the democratic party? I don't. So anyway, I think a lot of people see it that way. They're in a party because they have in an absolute sense, somewhat more power there, but that power never manifests as anything. the DNC has exhibited ample capacity to shut down anything that would represent positive change. I would say Trump defeated the RNC and he has now taken over their party so that's at least a different story, even if not necessarily a hopeful one, but but yes, the disaffected reside outside of the parties and inside of the parties, and they are the ones we must reach.

Elisabeth Sweet 2:10:08
So I think one, one final question that I think would be really good to send us off here is that is a question from the audience. And the question is this. How do we get this movement talked about in the media, on large platforms and outside of, and I'm adding this last part, but outside of maybe the the spaces that are controlled or tightly monitored by the parties?

Bret 2:10:35
Yeah, that's a great question. And in some sense, I think we have to open our eyes, there is a force that doesn't want change. Why? Because it's the way things are structured is very profitable for it. It not only controls the parties, but it controls our media sufficient to prevent movements outside from gaining hold. We have seen that the control is weakening, Bernie Sanders showed that it was weakening, Donald Trump showed that it was weakening. Andrew Yang showed that it was weakening Tulsi gavaged showed that it was weakening. And so I think the point is, we have to defeat it. It doesn't have to let us in. But if it doesn't let us in. It's telling you something about its commitment to discussing things that are important. And if you're paying attention to alternative sources, then you know that there are certain stories that never show up in the mainstream media. And that that has something to do with a desire to keep on script rather than to admit what's actually taking place. And, you know, if you had somebody in your life that was committed to you not knowing important facts about things that were going on, in and around you, you would exclude them, because you would know that they were up to no good. And in this case, that's what we have, we have a malevolent force, and it's very unpatriotic, and it doesn't have our well being at heart. And we have an obligation to confront it. So I would say It'd be great if we could gain access to the mainstream media, but I don't think we should expect them to let us in. And their failure to do so is evidence that we have to go around and there are plenty of alternative places that we can go. It's just a question of whether people will tune into them.

Greg Ellis 2:12:36
I'm curious, but when you If I may, when you talk about mainstream media, if you were to pick a show, or a an outlet, or someone to sit down and talk with who if you had the choice to pick, who would it be? Who would you sit down from mainstream media and break bread with and share the story of the articles of unity?

Bret 2:13:03
It's a good question. I mean, I've you know, I've gone on Fox, and I've talked to Tucker Carlson about it. You know, he is more open to these things than anything on the left side. But I would say this is really up to them. You know, the New York Times doesn't like this idea. Why doesn't it like this idea? Because it has a very clear sense of keeping, you know, the New York Times has gone from being the paper of record to being like a set of blinders, right? That just keeps a certain kind of voter from seeing things that would disturb them. And I wish I knew the answer to your question, but but the structure has become so corrupt, that I'm waiting for somebody inside of it to break out and make contact and say, actually, we see it too. I don't think it is necessarily sensible to point to particular voices there and expect them to respond because they won't know hey. All right. Was there more Elizabeth?

Elisabeth Sweet 2:14:10
No, that's, that's all I got.

Bret 2:14:13
All right. Any final thoughts? Greg.

Greg Ellis 2:14:18
Final thoughts. I believe that there is going to be a breakthrough with mainstream media. I believe that there are already people there. I think there are there are more people aware of the articles of unity, then then perhaps we realize and I think the message spreads far and wide and propagates in ways very difficult to track and keep the metrics of and success what is success? How do we define it? I'm I'm, I want to say thank you to everyone who's tuned in as and as watched. I want to thank you, Elizabeth, for them. Allow me to be part of this. And Brad, thank you for the invitation. It's marvelous to join in the discourse and be a part of this, this movement and this ticket. And I just encourage people to listen more to help it grow, get involved, and have a lovely time.

Bret 2:15:19
Wonderful, I must say I am filled with admiration for you both as well. As I think I said last time, the greatest part of being involved in the unity movement is discovering all of these marvelous, quirky patriots who are really committed to saving the nation in spite of its worst instincts. And anyway, I salute you both and thanks for joining me, and let's move forward.

Greg Ellis 2:15:52
As you might say, hell yeah Weinstein Hell yeah.

Bret 2:15:55
All right. Bye, guys.

Greg Ellis 2:15:58
I thank you. Good night. Good night, be well, everyone.

This transcript was generated by https://otter.ai